#----------------------------------------------------------------------
#【經文資訊】大正新脩大藏經 第 30 冊 No. 1579 瑜伽師地論
#【版本記錄】發行日期：2023-12，最後更新：2023-11-09
#【編輯說明】本資料庫由 財團法人佛教電子佛典基金會（CBETA）依「大正新脩大藏經」所編輯
#【原始資料】蕭鎮國大德提供，維習安大德提供之高麗藏 CD 經文，維習安大德提供，西蓮淨苑輸入，惠敏法師提供科判，《瑜伽師地論》資料庫提供新式標點
#【其他事項】本資料庫可自由免費流通，詳細內容請參閱【財團法人佛教電子佛典基金會資料庫版權宣告】
#----------------------------------------------------------------------

No. 1579 [cf. Nos. 1580-1584]
瑜伽師地論卷第一
Yogācārabhūmi Śāstra, Volume One

彌勒菩薩說
Maitreya Bodhisattva said

三藏法師玄奘奉　詔譯
Tripiṭaka Dharma Master Xuánzàng, commissioned by imperial decree, translated.

本地分中五識身相應地第一
The fundamental section among [the teachings on] the five corporeal-associated consciousnesses, Stage One.

云何瑜伽師地？
What is Yogācārabhūmi?

謂十七地。
Refers to seventeen stages.

何等十七？
What are the seventeen?

嗢拕南曰：
Vasubandhu says:

五識相應、意、　　有尋伺等三、
Five consciousnesses corresponding, mano (mind), vitarka vicāra etc. three,
三摩地俱、非、　　有心、無心地、
samādhi together, not, citta, acitta state,
聞、思、修所立、　　如是具三乘、
śruti, cintā, bhāvanā established, thus equipped with triyāna,

有依、及無依，　　是名十七地。
āśrita, and anāśrita, this is called the seventeen bhūmis.

一者、五識身相應地，二者、意地，三者、有尋有伺地，四者、無尋唯伺地，五者、無尋無伺地，六者、三摩呬多地，七者、非三摩呬多地，八者、有心地，九者、無心地，十者、聞所成地，十一者、思所成地，十二者、修所成地，十三者、聲聞地，十四者、獨覺地，十五者、菩薩地，十六者、有餘依地，十七者、無餘依地。
1. five aggregating consciousnesses ground (pañca-vijñāna-kāya-saṁyukta-bhūmi),
2. thinking ground (mano-bhūmi),
3. first dhyana - gross thought and subtle contemplation ground (vitarka-vicāra-sahita-bhūmi) [[  ([active] investigation (vitarka) and [passive] consideration (vicāra) possessing ground) ]],
4. second dhyana - lacking gross thought, only subtle contemplation ground (avitarka-vicāra-mātra-bhūmi),
5. third dhyana - neither gross thought nor subtle contemplation ground (avitarka-avicāra-bhūmi),
6. samādhi ground (samādhi-bhūmi),
7. without samādhi ground (asamādhi-bhūmi),
8. mind ground (citta-bhūmi),
9. without mind ground (acitta-bhūmi),
10. that which is heard accomplishing ground (śruti-sampatti-bhūmi),
11. cognition accomplishing ground (cintā-sampatti-bhūmi),
12. meditation accomplishing ground (bhāvanā-sampatti-bhūmi),
13. voice hearer ground (śrāvaka-bhūmi),
14. hermit buddha ground (pratyekabuddha-bhūmi),
15. bodhisattva ground (bodhisattva-bhūmi),
16. dependent ground (āśrita-bhūmi),
17. not dependent ground (anāśrita-bhūmi).

如是略說十七，名為瑜伽師地。
Thus briefly spoken seventeen, named as Yogācāra-bhūmi.

云何五識身相應地？謂五識身自性，彼所依，彼所緣，彼助伴，彼作業，如是總名五識身相應地。
What is the five-consciousness-body-aggregation-ground (pañca-vijñāna-kāya-saṁyukta-bhūmi)?

It refers to the five-consciousness-body-nature (pañca-vijñāna-kāya-svabhāva), that which it relies upon, that which it is conditioned by, its assisting factors, its actions, thus collectively called the five consciousness body aggregation ground (pañca-vijñāna-kāya-saṁyukta-bhūmi).

何等名為五識身耶？所謂眼識、耳識、鼻識、舌識、身識。
What is the five-consciousness-body (pañca-vijñāna-kāya)?

It is called eye consciousness (cakṣur-vijñāna), ear consciousness (śrotra-vijñāna), nose consciousness (ghrāṇa-vijñāna), tongue consciousness (jihvā-vijñāna), body consciousness (kāya-vijñāna).

云何眼識自性？謂依眼，了別色。
What does eye consciousness (cakṣur-vijñāna) mean?

It means dependent on the eye, differentiates form.

彼所依者，俱有依，謂眼。
That which is depended upon, together with its dependent, is called eye.

等無間依，謂意。
Equal uninterrupted dependence, is called thinking.

種子依，謂即此一切種子執受所依異熟所攝阿賴耶識。
Seed dependent, refers to "all seeds" (ālāya) held, received, and depended upon, encompassed by differential maturation (vipāka) within ālāyavijñāna.

如是略說二種所依。謂色、非色。眼是色，餘非色。
In this way, we say there are two kinds of dependents: form and non-form. The eye is form, the rest is non-form.

眼，謂四大種所造眼識所依淨色，無見有對。
The eye refers to the pure form upon which cakṣur-vijñāna depends, produced by the four great elements, without seeing or seer.

意，謂眼識無間過去識。
Mind (mano), refers to the uninterrupted continuity of past conscioussness (vijñāna) with eye conscioussnes (cakṣur-vijñāna).

一切種子識，謂無始時來樂著戲論熏習為因所生一切種子異熟識。
All seeds of consciousness, said to have arisen since beginningless time from attachment to pleasure, play, and speculation, give rise to all types of consciousness that experience different outcomes.

彼所緣者，謂色，有見有對。此復多種。
That which is objectified, is referred to as rūpa (form), having visibility and tangibility. There are many types of these.

略說有三，謂顯色、形色、表色。
Briefly, there are three, namely rūpa (visible form), saṃsthāna (shape/form), and nimitta (characteristic sign).

顯色者，謂青、黃、赤、白、光、影、明、闇、雲、煙、塵、霧，及空一顯色。
rūpa, namely blue, yellow, red, white, light, shadow, brightness, darkness, clouds, smoke, dust, mist, and the singular visible form of space.

形色者，謂長、短、方、圓、麁、細、正、不正、高、下色。
saṃsthāna, referring to long, short, square, round, coarse, fine, straight, crooked, high, low form.

表色者，謂取、捨、屈、伸、行、住、坐、臥，如是等色。
Indicative color refers to grasp, release, bend, stretch, walk, stand, sit, lie, and such colors.

又顯色者，謂若色顯了，眼識所行。
nimitta, refers to grasping, releasing, bending, stretching, walking, standing, sitting, lying down, and such characteristics.

形色者，謂若色積集長短等分別相。
Furthermore, rūpa refers to colors that become distinctly visible, where the eye consciousness operates.

表色者，謂即此積集色，生滅相續，由變異因，於先生處不復重生，轉於異處，或無間、或有間、或近、或遠差別生。或即於此處變異生，是名表色。
Nimitta refers to this aggregation of colors, the succession of arising and ceasing, due to varying causes, not being reborn again at the initial place of arising, but moving to a different location, sometimes seamlessly, sometimes not, sometimes near, sometimes far, differing in emergence. Or it may vary and arise right in this place, this is named nimitta.

又顯色者，謂光、明等差別。
Furthermore, that which reveals form, is called light, brightness, and other such distinctions.

形色者，謂長、短等積集差別。
Saṃsthāna refers to distinctions in aggregates such as long and short.

表色者，謂業用為依轉動差別。
Nimitta refers to the distinctions in movement relying on the function of karma.

如是一切顯、形、表色，是眼所行、眼境界、眼識所行、眼識境界、眼識所緣，意識所行、意識境界、意識所緣，名之差別。
Thus, all such rūpa, saṃsthāna, and nimitta are the operations of the eye, the domain of the eye, the operations of eye consciousness, the domain of eye consciousness, the object of eye consciousness, the operations of mental consciousness, the domain of mental consciousness, the object of mental consciousness, termed distinctions.

又即此色復有三種。謂若好顯色、若惡顯色、若俱異顯色，似色顯現。
Furthermore, this rūpa again comprises three kinds. Namely, whether it is pleasant rūpa, whether it is unpleasant rūpa, or whether it is neutral rūpa, resembling visible appearances.

彼助伴者，謂彼俱有相應諸心所有法。所謂作意、觸、受、想、思、及餘眼識俱有相應諸心所有法。
Its assisting factors refer to those concurrent mental factors associated with it. Namely intention (cetanā), contact (sparśa), feeling (vedanā), perception (saṃjñā), conception (vitarka), and other mental factors associated with cakṣur-vijñāna.

又彼諸法同一所緣，非一行相，俱有相應，一一而轉。
Furthermore, these dharma share the same object, are not of identical activity, correspond concurrently, and each transforms individually.

又彼一切各各從自種子而生。
Furthermore, all of them arise individually from their own seeds.

彼作業者，當知有六種。
Its actions should be known to have six types.

謂唯了別自境所緣，是名初業。
Namely, only discerning the object of its own domain, this is called the first action.

唯了別自相，唯了別現在，唯一剎那了別。
Namely, only discerning its own characteristic, only discerning the present, only discerning in a single instant.

復有二業。
Furthermore, there are two more actions.

謂隨意識轉、隨善染轉、隨發業轉。
Namely, turning following consciousness, turning with virtuous defilements, and turning initiating karma.

又復能取愛非愛果，是第六業。
Also, being able to obtain the results of attachment and non-attachment, this is the sixth action.

云何耳識自性？謂依耳，了別聲。
What is the svabhāva of śrotra-vijñāna?

It means dependent on the ear, discerns sounds.

彼所依者，俱有依，謂耳。
That which it relies upon is together with its support, namely the ear.

等無間依，謂意。
Equal uninterrupted dependence, is called thinking.

種子依，謂一切種子阿賴耶識。
Seed reliance refers to the ālāyavijñāna, which is the basis upon which all seeds are grasped.

耳，謂四大種所造耳識所依淨色，無見有對。
The ear, refers to the pure form upon which śrotra-vijñāna relies, produced by the four great elements, without the act of seeing or possessing an object.

意及種子，如前分別。
Mano (mind) and seeds, as previously distinguished.

彼所緣者，謂聲，無見有對。
That which is objectified refers to sound, without the act of seeing or possessing an object.

此復多種。如螺貝聲、大小鼓聲、舞聲、歌聲、諸音樂聲、俳戲叫聲、女聲、男聲、風林等聲、明了聲、不明了聲、有義聲、無義聲、下中上聲、江河等聲、鬪諍諠雜聲、受持演說聲、論義決擇聲。如是等類，有眾多聲。
This again consists of many kinds. Such as the sound of conch shells, the sound of large and small drums, the sound of dancing, singing, various musical sounds, the cries in drama, female voices, male voices, sounds of wind in the forest, etc., clear sounds, unclear sounds, meaningful sounds, meaningless sounds, low, middle, high sounds, sounds of rivers and streams, noisy quarreling sounds, the sound of receiving and expounding teachings, the sound of discussing and deciding on doctrines. Such types include numerous sounds.

此略三種。謂因執受大種聲、因不執受大種聲、因執受不執受大種聲。
This is briefly three kinds: namely, sounds due to grasping at great elements, sounds not due to grasping at great elements, and sounds due to both grasping and not grasping at great elements.

初唯內緣聲，次唯外緣聲，後內外緣聲。
The first is solely internally conditioned sounds, the second is solely externally conditioned sounds, and the latter is both internally and externally conditioned sounds.

此復三種。謂可意聲、不可意聲、俱相違聲。
This again consists of three kinds: namely, agreeable sounds, disagreeable sounds, and sounds that are a mix of both.

又復聲者，謂鳴、音、詞、吼表彰語等差別之名。
Furthermore, regarding sound, it refers to the distinctions in names such as ringing, tones, words, roars, and expressions denoting language, etc.

是耳所行、耳境界，耳識所行、耳識境界、耳識所緣，意識所行、意識境界、意識所緣。
Thus, these are the operations of the ear, the domain of the ear, the operations of ear consciousness, the domain of ear consciousness, the object of ear consciousness, the operations of mental consciousness, the domain of mental consciousness, the object of mental consciousness.

助伴及業，如眼識應知。
Its assisting factors and actions should be known as in the case of the eye consciousness.

云何鼻識自性？謂依鼻，了別香。
What is the svabhāva of ghrāṇa-vijñāna?

It means dependent on the nose, discerns odors.

彼所依者，俱有依，謂鼻。
That which it relies upon is together with its support, namely the nose.

等無間依，謂意。
Equal uninterrupted dependence, is called thinking.

種子依，謂一切種子阿賴耶識。
Seed reliance refers to the ālāyavijñāna, which is the basis upon which all seeds are grasped.

鼻，謂四大種所造鼻識所依淨色，無見有對。
The nose, refers to the pure form upon which ghrāṇa-vijñāna relies, produced by the four great elements, without the act of seeing or possessing an object.

意及種子，如前分別。
Mano (mind) and seeds, as previously distinguished.

彼所緣者，謂香、無見有對。
That which is objectified refers to odor, without the act of seeing or possessing an object.

此復多種。
This again consists of many kinds.

謂好香、惡香、平等香，鼻所嗅知根、莖、華、葉、果、實之香。
Namely, pleasant odors, unpleasant odors, neutral odors; odors known by the nose from roots, stems, flowers, leaves, fruits, and seeds.

如是等類，有眾多香。
Such types include numerous odors.

又香者，謂鼻所聞、鼻所取、鼻所嗅等差別之名。
Furthermore, regarding odor, it refers to the distinctions in names such as what is smelled by the nose, what is acquired by the nose, what is sniffed by the nose, etc.

是鼻所行、鼻境界，鼻識所行、鼻識境界、鼻識所緣，意識所行、意識境界、意識所緣。
Thus, these are the operations of the nose, the domain of the nose, the operations of nose consciousness, the domain of nose consciousness, the object of nose consciousness, the operations of mental consciousness, the domain of mental consciousness, the object of mental consciousness.

助伴及業，如前應知。
Its assisting factors and actions should be known as previously.

云何舌識自性？謂依舌，了別味。
What is the svabhāva of jihvā-vijñāna? It means dependent on the tongue, discerns flavors.

彼所依者，俱有依，謂舌。
That which it relies upon is together with its support, namely the tongue.

等無間依，謂意。
Equal uninterrupted dependence, is called thinking.

種子依，謂一切種子阿賴耶識。
Seed reliance refers to the ālāyavijñāna, which is the basis upon which all seeds are grasped.

舌，謂四大種所造舌識所依淨色，無見有對。
The tongue, refers to the pure form upon which jihvā-vijñāna relies, produced by the four great elements, without the act of seeing or possessing an object.

意及種子，如前分別。
Mano (mind) and seeds, as previously distinguished.

彼所緣者，謂味，無見有對。
That which is objectified refers to taste, without the act of seeing or possessing an object.

此復多種。謂苦、酢、辛、甘、鹹、淡、可意、不可意、若捨處所，舌所甞。
This again consists of many kinds. Namely bitter, sour, spicy, sweet, salty, bland, agreeable, disagreeable, or neutral places, tasted by the tongue.

又味者，謂應甞、應吞、應噉、應飲、應舐、應吮、應受用，如是等差別之名。
Furthermore, regarding taste, it refers to distinctions in names such as what should be tasted, swallowed, chewed, drunk, licked, sucked, accepted for use, and so on.

是舌所行、舌境界，舌識所行、舌識境界、舌識所緣，意識所行、意識境界、意識所緣。
Thus, these are the operations of the tongue, the domain of the tongue, the operations of tongue consciousness, the domain of tongue consciousness, the object of tongue consciousness, the operations of mental consciousness, the domain of mental consciousness, the object of mental consciousness.

助伴及業，如前應知。
Its assisting factors and actions should be known as previously.

云何身識自性？謂依身，了別觸。
What is the svabhāva of kāya-vijñāna? It means dependent on the body, discerns touch.

彼所依者，俱有依，謂身。
That which it relies upon is together with its support, namely the body.

等無間依，謂意。
Equal uninterrupted dependence, is called thinking.

種子依，謂一切種子阿賴耶識。
Seed reliance refers to the ālāyavijñāna, which is the basis upon which all seeds are grasped.

身，謂四大種所造身識所依淨色，無見有對。
Body, refers to the pure form upon which kāya-vijñāna relies, produced by the four great elements, without the act of seeing or possessing an object.

意及種子，如前分別。
Mano (mind) and seeds, as previously distinguished.

彼所緣者，謂觸，無見有對。
That which is objectified refers to touch, without the act of seeing or possessing an object.

此復多種。謂地、水、火、風、輕性、重性、滑性、澁性、冷、飢、渴、飽、力、劣、緩、急、病、老、死、蛘、悶、粘、疲、息、軟怯、勇，如是等類，有眾多觸。
This again consists of many kinds. Namely earth, water, fire, wind, lightness, heaviness, smoothness, roughness, coldness, hunger, thirst, fullness, strength, weakness, slowness, quickness, illness, old age, death, itching, suffocation, stickiness, fatigue, breathing, timidity, courage, and so on. Such types include numerous touches.

此復三種。謂好觸、惡觸、捨處所觸、身所觸。
This again is of three kinds: namely, pleasant touch, unpleasant touch, neutral touch/locations of touch, and bodily touch.

又觸者，謂所摩、所觸、若鞕、若軟、若動、若煖，如是等差別之名。
Furthermore, regarding touch, it refers to distinctions in names such as what is rubbed, touched, whether hard, whether soft, whether moving, whether warm, and so on.

是身所行，身境界，身識所行、身識境界、身識所緣，意識所行、意識境界、意識所緣。
Thus, these are the operations of the body, the domain of the body, the operations of body consciousness, the domain of body consciousness, the object of body consciousness, the operations of mental consciousness, the domain of mental consciousness, the object of mental consciousness.

助伴及業、如前應知。
Its assisting factors and actions should be known as previously.

復次，雖眼不壞，色現在前，能生作意若不正起，所生眼識必不得生。
Furthermore, even if the eye is not impaired and forms are present in front of it, should the intention that arises be improper or not rightly initiated, the resultant cakṣur-vijñāna certainly will not manifest.

要眼不壞，色現在前，能生作意正復現起，所生眼識方乃得生。
Only if the eye is undamaged and the forms are present in front, and the arising intention is proper and correctly initiated, then the arising cakṣur-vijñāna can indeed manifest.

如眼識生，乃至身識，應知亦爾。
Just as with the arising of cakṣur-vijñāna, up to the arising of kāya-vijñāna, it should be known to be the same.

復次，由眼識生，三心可得。
Furthermore, from the arising of cakṣur-vijñāna, three types of mind can be obtained.

如其次第，謂率爾心、尋求心、決定心。
According to their sequence, they are referred to as the impulsive mind, the searching mind, and the decisive mind.

初是眼識，二在意識。
The first is cakṣur-vijñāna, and the second is in mano-vijñāna.

決定心後方有染淨。
After the determination of the mind, there is defilement and purification.

此後乃有等流眼識善不善轉。而彼不由自分別力，乃至此意不趣餘境，經爾所時，眼意二識或善或染，相續而轉。
After this, there exist neutral cakṣur-vijñāna that transform into either wholesome or unwholesome states. Yet, this transformation does not occur through their own power of discrimination, until such a time when this intention does not engage with other objects, both the cakṣur-vijñāna and the mano-vijñāna continue turning, either wholesome or defiled.

如眼識生，乃至身識，應知亦爾。
Just as with the arising of cakṣur-vijñāna, up to the arising of kāya-vijñāna, it should be known to be the same.

復次，應觀五識所依，如往餘方者所乘。所緣，如所為事。助伴，如同侶。業，如自功能。
Furthermore, one should observe the support of the five vijñānas, like the vehicle for those going elsewhere. The object, like the task at hand. The assisting factors, like companions. The actions, like one's own functions.

復有差別。應觀五識所依，如居家者家。所緣，如所受用。助伴，如僕使等。業，如作用。
There are also distinctions. One should observe the support of the five vijñānas, like a household for those who dwell in homes. The object, like the utilities used. The assisting factors, like servants and the like. The actions, like functions performed.

本地分中意地第二之一
In the fundamental section, the second of the mano-bhūmi

已說五識身相應地。
The section on the five consciousnesses corresponding to the corporeal has been explained.

云何意地？
What is mano-bhūmi?

此亦五相應知。謂自性故，彼所依故，彼所緣故，彼助伴故，彼作業故。
This also consists of five corresponding aspects of knowledge. Namely, because of its own nature, because of what it relies upon, because of what it is conditioned by, because of its assisting factors, and because of its actions.

云何意自性？謂心、意、識。
What is the own nature of mano? It refers to mind, intention, and consciousness.

心，謂一切種子所隨、依止性所隨、(依附依止)性、體能執受、異熟所攝阿賴耶識。
Mind, refers to the ālāyavijñāna, which all seeds follow, depends upon, has the nature of reliance and attachment, has the capacity to grasp and receive, and encompasses differential maturation.

意，謂恒行意，及六識身無間滅意。
Intention refers to the constantly operating intention, and the uninterrupted cessation of intention in the six consciousnesses.

識，謂現前了別所緣境界。
Consciousness refers to the discernment of the present object of cognition.

彼所依者，等無間依，謂意。
That which it depends upon is equal uninterrupted dependence, is called thinking.

種子依，謂如前說一切種子阿賴耶識。
Seed reliance refers to the ālāyavijñāna, which is the basis upon which all seeds are grasped, as previously stated.

彼所緣者，謂一切法，如其所應。若不共者，所緣即受想行蘊、無為、無見無對色、六內處，及一切種子。
That which it is conditioned by refers to all dharmas, as they should be. In the case of the unshared, the conditioned is immediately the aggregates of sensation, perception, formation, the unconditioned, formless form without sight and without object, the six internal bases, and all seeds.

彼助伴者，謂作意、觸、受、想、思，欲、勝解、念、三摩地，慧、信、慚、愧、無貪、無瞋、無癡、精進、輕安、不放逸、捨、不害、貪、恚、無明、慢、見、疑，忿、恨、覆、惱、嫉、慳、誑、諂、憍、害，無慚、無愧，惛沈、掉舉、不信、懈怠、放逸、邪欲、邪勝解、忘念、散亂、不正知，惡作、睡眠、尋、伺，如是等輩俱有相應心所有法，是名助伴。
Its assisting factors refer to intention (cetanā), contact (sparśa), sensation (vedanā), perception (saṃjñā), concept (vitarka), desire, superior understanding, mindfulness, samādhi, wisdom, faith, shame, compunction, non-greed, non-anger, non-delusion, diligence, ease, non-laxity, equanimity, non-harmfulness, greed, anger, ignorance, arrogance, views, doubt, hostility, resentment, deception, vexation, jealousy, stinginess, deceit, flattery, complacency, harmfulness, shamelessness, lack of compunction, torpor, restlessness, disbelief, laziness, laxity, wrong desire, wrong understanding, forgetfulness, distraction, incorrect knowledge, unwholesome actions, sleepiness, searching, examining, and such associated mental factors, this is called assisting factors.

同一所緣，非同一行相，一時俱有一一而轉，各自種子所生。
They share the same condition, but not the same activities. Concurrently existing at a single moment, each transforms individually, born from their respective seeds.

更互相應，有行相，有所緣，有所依。
Furthermore, they correspond to each other, have activities, have conditions, and have supports.

彼作業者，謂能了別自境所緣，是名初業。
Its actions refer to the ability to discern the objects of its own domain, this is called the first action.

復能了別自相、共相。
Furthermore, [it] is capable of discerning its own characteristic and common characteristics.

復能了別去來今世。
Moreover, [it] is capable of discerning the past, future, and present lives.

復剎那了別，或相續了別。
Additionally, [it] discerns either instantaneously or continuously.

復為轉、隨轉，發淨不淨一切法業。
Furthermore, [it] serves to transform and follow transformation, generating actions of all dharmas, both pure and impure.

復能取愛非愛果。
Moreover, [it] is capable of obtaining the results of attachment and non-attachment.

復能引餘識身，又能為因，發起等流識身。
Additionally, [it] can lead the other vijñānas and also serves as a cause to initiate neutral vijñānas.

又諸意識望餘識身有勝作業。謂分別所緣，審慮所緣，若醉，若狂，若夢，若覺，若悶，若醒，若能發起身業、語業，若能離欲，若離欲退，若斷善根，若續善根，若死，若生等。
Furthermore, all mano-vijñānas have superior activities in comparison to other vijñānas. These include discriminating the conditioned, contemplating the conditioned, whether intoxicated, mad, dreaming, awakened, suffocated, roused, capable of initiating physical and verbal actions, able to renounce desires, retreating from renunciation of desire, severing wholesome roots, continuing wholesome roots, in death, in birth, etc.

云何分別所緣？由七種分別。謂有相分別、無相分別、任運分別、尋求分別、伺察分別、染污分別、不染污分別。
How is the conditioned discriminated? Through seven kinds of discrimination: namely, discrimination with characteristics, discrimination without characteristics, spontaneous discrimination, searching discrimination, scrutinizing discrimination, defiled discrimination, and undefiled discrimination.

有相分別者，謂於先所受義、諸根成就善名言者所起分別。
Discrimination with characteristics refers to the discrimination that arises in relation to meanings previously grasped, by those accomplished in the roots and endowed with good eloquence.

無相分別者，謂隨先所引，及嬰兒等不善名言者所有分別。
Discrimination without characteristics refers to the discrimination belonging to those who, following previous indications and like infants, are not skilled in eloquence.

任運分別者，謂於現前境界，隨境勢力任運而轉所有分別。
Spontaneous discrimination refers to the discrimination that turns according to the power of the present conditions, moving freely with the influence of the circumstances.

尋求分別者，謂於諸法觀察尋求所起分別。
Searching discrimination refers to the discrimination that arises from observing and searching among all dharmas.

伺察分別者，謂於已所尋求、已所觀察，伺察安立所起分別。
Scrutinizing discrimination refers to the discrimination that arises from scrutinizing and establishing what has already been searched for and observed.

染污分別者，謂於過去顧戀俱行、於未來希樂俱行、於現在執著俱行所有分別。若欲分別、若恚分別、若害分別，或隨與一煩惱、隨煩惱相應所起分別。
Defiled discrimination refers to the discrimination that accompanies reflecting with attachment on the past, desiring pleasure in the future, and adhering in the present. Whether discrimination of desire, discrimination of anger, discrimination of harm, or discrimination that accompanies or corresponds to a particular affliction.

不染污分別者，若善、若無記。謂出離分別、無恚分別、無害分別、或隨與一信等善法相應。或威儀路、工巧處，及諸變化所有分別。如是等類，名分別所緣。
Undefiled discrimination refers to either wholesome or neutral [actions]. It includes discrimination of renunciation, discrimination without anger, discrimination without harm, or discrimination that accompanies or corresponds to a wholesome dharma such as faith. Or discrimination in conduct, craftsmanship, and all transformations. Such types are named as what the conditioned discriminates.

云何審慮所緣？謂如理所引、不如理所引，非如理非不如理所引。
How is the conditioned contemplated? It refers to being led by reason, not led by reason, and neither led by reason nor not led by reason.

如理所引者：謂不增益非真實有，如四顛倒。謂於無常常倒，於苦樂倒，於不淨淨倒，於無我我倒。亦不損減諸真實有，如諸邪見。謂無施與等諸邪見行。
Being led by reason refers to not exaggerating the unreal as real, such as the four inversions. It means regarding the impermanent as permanent, suffering as happiness, the impure as pure, and the selfless as having a self. Also, not diminishing the truly existent, like various wrong views. It means actions based on wrong views such as denying the acts of giving, etc.

或法住智，如實了知諸所知事。或善清淨出世間智，如實覺知所知諸法。如是名為如理所引。
Or the wisdom residing in the Dharma, truly understanding all knowable things. Or the good, pure, transcendent wisdom, truly comprehending all known dharmas. Such is named as being led by reason.

與此相違，當知不如理所引。非如理非不如理所引者，謂依無記慧審察諸法。如是名為審慮所緣。
Contrary to this, one should know [it] as not led by reason. Being neither led by reason nor not led by reason refers to examining dharmas based on neutral wisdom. Such is named as what the conditioned contemplates.

云何醉？謂由依止性羸劣故，或不習飲故，或極數飲故，或過量飲故，便致醉亂。
What is intoxication?

It refers to becoming inebriated due to relying on a weak disposition, or from not being accustomed to drinking, or from drinking extremely frequently, or from consuming an excessive amount, thus leading to disorder.

云何狂？謂由先業所引，或由諸界錯亂，或由驚怖失志，或由打觸末摩，或由鬼魅所著，而發癲狂。
What is madness?

It refers to being induced by past actions, or by confusion among the faculties, or by panic and loss of resolution, or by physical beatings and harsh treatment, or by being possessed by spirits, thereby manifesting insanity.

云何夢？謂由依止性羸劣；或由疲倦過失；或由食所沈重；或由於闇相作意思惟；或由休息一切事業；或由串習睡眠；或由他所引發，如由搖扇，或由明呪，或由於藥，或由威神；而發惛夢。
What is a dream?

It refers to being based on a weak disposition; or due to fatigue and errors; or due to heavy digestion from food; or due to concentrating thought in darkness; or due to resting from all activities; or due to habitual sleeping; or triggered by something else, such as by being fanned, by reciting spells, by medicine, or by supernatural beings; thereby producing confused dreams.

云何覺？謂睡增者不勝疲極故，有所作者要期睡故，或他所引，從夢而覺。
What is awakening?

It refers to the inability to continue sleeping due to extreme tiredness, the need to sleep because of tasks that must be done, or being awakened by something else, awakening from a dream.

云何悶？謂由風熱亂故；或由捶打故；或由瀉故，如過量轉痢及出血；或由極勤勞；而致悶絕。
What is suffocation?

It refers to being caused by disordered wind and heat; or by beatings; or by diarrheal purging, such as excessive dysentery and bleeding; or by extreme exertion; thereby leading to unconsciousness.

云何醒？謂於悶已而復出離。
What is arousal?

It refers to emerging and departing from a state of unconsciousness.

云何發起身業、語業？謂由發身語業智前行故；次欲生故；次功用起故；次隨順功用為先，身語業風轉故；從此發起身業、語業。
What is the initiation of physical and verbal actions?

It refers to the precedence of the wisdom that instigates physical and verbal actions; followed by the arising of desire; then the initiation of effort; next the compliance with effort as a precursor, with the movement guided by the wind of physical and verbal actions; from this, physical and verbal actions are initiated.

云何離欲？謂隨順離欲根成就故，從他獲得隨順教誨故，遠離彼障故，方便正修無倒思惟故，方能離欲。
What is renunciation of desire?

It refers to being in concordance with the accomplishment of the root of desirelessness, obtaining guidance in line with others, distancing oneself from those obstructions, and through proper and unerring contemplation, one is able to renounce desire.

云何離欲退？謂性軟根故；新修善品者，數數思惟彼形狀相故；受行順退法故；煩惱所障故；惡友所攝故；從離欲退。
What is regression from renunciation of desire?

It refers to having a disposition that is easily influenced; for those who have newly cultivated good qualities, repeatedly contemplating those forms and appearances; because of practicing methods that lead to regression; due to obstructions by afflictions; because of being influenced by bad companions; one regresses from renunciation of desire.

云何斷善根？謂利根者，成就上品諸惡意樂現行法故；得隨順彼惡友故；彼邪見纏極重圓滿到究竟故；彼於一切惡現行中，得無畏故；無哀愍故；能斷善根。此中種子亦名善根，無貪瞋等亦名善根。但由安立現行善根相違相續，名斷善根；非由永拔彼種子故。
What is the severance of wholesome roots?

It refers to those of sharp faculties, who accomplish the present activities of various evil intentions and delights in superior forms; because they follow those bad companions; because their wrong views are extremely intense, complete, and ultimate; because they possess fearlessness among all evil present activities; due to the lack of compassion; they are capable of severing the wholesome roots. Here, seeds are also called wholesome roots, and the absence of greed, anger, etc., is also termed wholesome roots. However, it is named severing wholesome roots due to the establishment of the present activities that contradict the continuity of wholesome roots; not because of permanently uprooting those seeds.

云何續善根？謂由性利根故；見親朋友修福業故；詣善丈夫聞正法故；因生猶豫，證決定故；還續善根。
What is the continuation of wholesome roots?

It refers to being of sharp faculties; seeing friends and relatives performing meritorious actions; visiting virtuous individuals and hearing the true dharma; because of hesitation arising, and then achieving certainty; thereby continuing the wholesome roots.

云何死？謂由壽量極故，而便致死。此復三種。謂壽盡故，福盡故，不避不平等故。當知亦是時非時死。或由善心，或不善心，或無記心。
What is death?

It refers to reaching the end of one's lifespan, thereby leading to death. This again is of three types: due to the exhaustion of lifespan, the exhaustion of merit, and due to unavoidable circumstances like accidents. It should be known that this includes both timely and untimely deaths. It may be caused by a wholesome mind, an unwholesome mind, or a neutral mind.

云何壽盡故死？猶如有一，隨感壽量滿盡故死，此名時死。
What is death due to the exhaustion of lifespan?

It is similar to someone who dies because the lifespan dictated by their karma is fully exhausted; this is called a timely death.

云何福盡故死？猶如有一，資具闕故死。

What is death due to the exhaustion of merit?

It is similar to someone who dies due to a lack of necessary provisions.

云何不避不平等故死？如世尊說：九因九緣，未盡壽量而死。何等為九？謂食無度量，食所不宜，不消復食，生而不吐，熟而持之，不近醫藥，不知於己若損若益，非時、非量行非梵行，此名非時死。
What is death due to unavoidable circumstances like accidents?

As the Buddha said: due to nine causes and conditions, one dies before their lifespan is exhausted. What are the nine? They are: eating without moderation, eating inappropriate foods, re-eating without digestion, retaining what should be vomited, holding onto what is spoiled, not seeking medical treatment, not knowing what harms or benefits oneself, engaging in non-virtuous conduct at inappropriate times and in inappropriate amounts; this is called an untimely death.

云何善心死？猶如有一，將命終時，自憶先時所習善法；或復由他令彼憶念。由此因緣，爾時信等善法現行於心，乃至麁想現行。若細想行時，善心即捨，唯住無記心。所以者何？彼於爾時，於曾習善亦不能憶，他亦不能令彼憶念。
What is death with a wholesome mind?

It is like someone who, at the time of dying, recalls the wholesome dharma practiced earlier; or alternatively, is reminded of it by someone else. Due to these conditions, at that time, wholesome dharmas such as faith become active in the mind, even including coarse contemplation. When subtle contemplation occurs, the wholesome mind is relinquished, leaving only the neutral mind. Why is this so? At that time, they are unable to recall the wholesome they had practiced, nor can others make them remember it.

云何不善心死？猶如有一，命將欲終，自憶先時串習惡法；或復由他令彼憶念。彼於爾時，貪瞋等俱諸不善法現行於心。乃至麁、細等想現行，如前善說。又善心死時，安樂而死。將欲終時、無極苦受逼迫於身。惡心死時、苦惱而死。將命終時，極重苦受逼迫於身。
What is death with an unwholesome mind? It is like someone who, at the brink of death, recalls the unwholesome dharma practiced earlier; or alternatively, is reminded of it by someone else. At that time, unwholesome dharmas such as greed and anger become active in the mind. Even coarse and subtle thoughts occur, as previously explained in the case of a wholesome death. Additionally, one with a wholesome mind dies in peace. When nearing death, there is no extreme suffering afflicting the body. In contrast, one with an unwholesome mind dies in distress. At the time of death, severe suffering afflicts the body.

又善心死者，見不亂色相。不善心死者，見亂色相。
Furthermore, one who dies with a wholesome mind sees orderly forms and colors. Conversely, one who dies with an unwholesome mind sees chaotic forms and colors.

云何無記心死？謂行善不善者，或不行者，將命終時，自不能憶，無他令憶。爾時非善心非不善心死。既非安樂死，亦非苦惱死。
What is death with a neutral mind? It refers to someone who has performed wholesome or unwholesome actions, or has not performed any, and at the time of dying, cannot remember by themselves, nor is reminded by others. At that time, they die neither with a wholesome mind nor with an unwholesome mind. It is neither a death in peace nor a death in distress.

又行善不善補特伽羅，將命終時，或自然憶先所習善及與不善，或他令憶。
Furthermore, individuals who have performed wholesome or unwholesome actions, at the time of dying, may naturally recall the wholesome and unwholesome practices they have learned previously, or may be reminded by others.

彼於爾時，於多曾習力最強者，其心偏記，餘悉皆忘。
At that time, their mind will particularly remember those practices which they have engaged in most strongly and frequently, while forgetting all others.

若俱平等曾串習者。
If [the practices] have been equally and habitually learned.

彼於爾時，隨初自憶，或他令憶，唯此不捨，不起餘心。
At that time, depending on what they first recall by themselves or are reminded of by others, they cling only to this and do not give rise to other minds.

彼於爾時，由二種因增上力故，而便命終。謂樂著戲論因增上力，及淨不淨業因增上力。
At that time, due to the reinforcing strength of two kinds of causes, they then pass away. These are the reinforcing strength of the cause of delight and attachment, and the reinforcing strength of the cause of pure and impure actions.

受盡先業所引果已，若行不善業者，當於爾時，受先所作諸不善業所得不愛果之前相，猶如夢中見無量種變怪色相。依此相故，薄伽梵說：若有先作惡不善業及增長已，彼於爾時，如日後分，或山山峯影等懸覆、遍覆、極覆。當知如是補特伽羅從明趣闇。
After experiencing the results led by past actions, if one has performed unwholesome actions, at that time, they perceive a premonition of the unloved results of all the unwholesome actions previously committed, similar to seeing countless strange and varied forms in a dream. Based on this vision, the Buddha said: if someone has previously engaged in evil and unwholesome actions and increased them, then at that time, like the shadow of a mountain peak in the latter part of the day, it covers overwhelmingly, extensively, and completely. Know that such a being moves from the light towards darkness.

若先受盡不善業果而修善者，與上相違。當知如是補特伽羅從闇趣明。
If, having experienced the results of unwholesome actions, one then cultivates wholesomeness, it is contrary to the above. Know that such a being moves from darkness towards light.

此中差別者，將命終時，猶如夢中見無量種非變怪色可意相生。若作上品不善業者，彼由見斯變怪相故，流汗毛竪，手足紛亂，遂失便穢，捫摸虛空，翻睛咀沫。彼於爾時，有如是等變怪相生。若造中品不善業者，彼於爾時，變怪之相或有或無，設有不具。
Among these distinctions, at the time of death, it is like seeing in a dream countless kinds of non-changing, strange forms that bring pleasure. If one has committed high-grade unwholesome actions, due to seeing these strange visions, they may sweat profusely, their hairs stand on end, their hands and feet become disorderly, they soil themselves, grope the empty air, roll their eyes, and drool. At that time, such bizarre signs appear in them. If one has committed mid-grade unwholesome actions, at that time, the appearance of strange visions may or may not occur, and even if they do, they are not complete.

又諸眾生將命終時，乃至未到惛昧想位，長時所習我愛現行。由此力故，謂我當無，便愛自身。由此建立中有、生報。若預流果及一來果，爾時我愛亦復現行。然此預流及一來果，於此我愛，由智慧力數數推求，制而不著。猶壯丈夫與羸劣者共相捔力，能制伏之。當知此中道理亦爾。若不還果，爾時我愛不復現行。
Furthermore, when sentient beings are at the brink of death, even before reaching the state of confounded and obscured thought, the habitual tendencies of self-attachment manifest for a long period. Due to the power of this, thinking "I will be no more," there arises affection for one’s own self. From this is established the intermediate state and the birth consequences. If there are predicted results and results to come, at that time, self-attachment also manifests. However, for these predicted results and results to come, through the power of wisdom frequently analyzed and not grasped upon, it is controlled. Like a strong man who can overpower a weaker one in a contest of strength, it should be known that the principle here is similar. If it is an anāgāmin (non-returner) result, at that time self-attachment does not manifest again.

又解肢節，除天、那落迦，所餘生處一切皆有。此復二種。一、重，二、輕。重謂作惡業者，輕謂作善業者。北拘盧洲一切皆輕。
Furthermore, the disintegration of the body parts occurs in all realms of existence except for the heavens and the Narakas (hells), this again is of two types: heavy and light. Heavy refers to those who have performed unwholesome actions, light refers to those who have performed wholesome actions. In the continent of Uttarakuru, all experience it lightly.

又色界沒時，皆具諸根。欲界沒時、隨所有根，或具、不具。
Furthermore, at the time of passing away from the realm of form (Rūpadhātu), all faculties are intact. At the time of passing away from the realm of desire (Kāmadhātu), depending on what faculties one possesses, they may be intact or incomplete.

又清淨解脫死者，名調善死。不清淨不解脫死者，名不調善死。
Furthermore, those who die with purity and liberation are called well-adjusted deaths. Those who die without purity and liberation are called ill-adjusted deaths.

又將終時，作惡業者，識於所依從上分捨。即從上分冷觸隨起，如此漸捨乃至心處。造善業者，識於所依從下分捨。即從下分冷觸隨起，如此漸捨乃至心處。當知後識唯心處捨。從此冷觸遍滿所依。
Additionally, at the time of approaching death, those who have committed unwholesome actions, their consciousness departs from its support starting from the upper part. Then, from the upper part, a sensation of coldness arises sequentially, abandoning it gradually down to the heart base. For those who have performed wholesome actions, their consciousness departs from its support starting from the lower part. Then, from the lower part, a sensation of coldness arises sequentially, abandoning it gradually up to the heart base. It should be known that the subsequent consciousness departs solely from the heart base. From this, the sensation of coldness spreads throughout the support.

云何生？
What is birth?

由我愛無間已生故，無始樂著戲論因已熏習故，淨不淨業因已熏習故。彼所依體由二種因增上力故，從自種子，即於是處中有、異熟無間得生。
Birth occurs due to the uninterrupted presence of self-attachment, due to the long-standing habituation to the causes of delight, attachment, and discourse from beginningless time, and due to the habituation to the causes of pure and impure actions. The physical basis of that which is born is strengthened by the power of these two causes, and from its own seeds, there is immediate birth in the intermediate state and in the differentiated fruition without interruption, right at that place.

死生同時，如秤兩頭，低昂時等。
Death and birth occur simultaneously, like the two ends of a scale, equal in the moment of tipping and balancing.

而此中有必具諸根。
And in this intermediate state, all faculties are necessarily present.

造惡業者所得中有，如黑羺光、或陰闇夜。作善業者所得中有，如白衣光、或晴明夜。
For those who have committed evil actions, the intermediate state they experience is like the light of a black lantern or a dark, moonless night. For those who have performed wholesome actions, the intermediate state they experience is like the light of white clothing or a clear, moonlit night.

又此中有是極清淨天眼所行。
Furthermore, this intermediate state is distinctly visible to the divine eye, which operates with utmost clarity.

彼於爾時，先我愛類不復現行，識已住故。
At that time, the previous manifestations of self-attachment no longer occur, because consciousness has settled.

然於境界起戲論愛，隨所當生，即彼形類中有而生。
However, attachment arising from delight and discourse towards objects emerges according to the realm one is to be born into, and thus one is born into the intermediate state resembling that form.

又中有眼猶如天眼，無有障礙，唯至生處。所趣無礙，如得神通，亦唯至生處。
Furthermore, the eyes in the intermediate state are like the divine eye, unobstructed, but only up to the place of rebirth. The movement towards the destination is unimpeded, as if possessing supernatural powers, yet also only up to the place of rebirth.

又由此眼，見己同類中有有情、及見自身當所生處。
Moreover, with this eye, one sees other beings in the intermediate state of the same kind, and also sees the place where one is to be reborn.

又造惡業者，眼視下淨，伏面而行；往天趣者上；往人趣者傍。
Also, those who have committed evil actions look downwards with clarity and walk with their faces downcast; those heading towards a heavenly realm look upwards; those heading towards a human realm look sideways.

又此中有，若未得生緣，極七日住。有得生緣，即不決定。若極七日未得生緣，死而復生，極七日住。如是展轉未得生緣，乃至七七日住，自此已後，決得生緣。
Furthermore, in this intermediate state, if the conditions for birth are not met, one stays for a maximum of seven days. If the conditions for birth are met, then it is not definite [how long one stays]. If at the end of seven days the conditions for birth are still not met, death occurs and is followed by rebirth, staying again for a maximum of seven days. Thus it cycles repeatedly until the conditions for birth are not met, up to seven sets of seven days. After this period, the conditions for birth are definitively met.

又此中有，七日死已，或即於此類生。若由餘業可轉中有種子轉者，便於餘類中生。
Additionally, in this intermediate state, after seven days have passed since death, one may be reborn into the same category of beings. If other karma allows for the transformation of the intermediate state's seed, then one is born into a different category of beings.

又此中有，有種種名。或名中有，在死生二有中間生故。或名健達縛，尋香行故，香所資故。或名意行，以意為依，往生處故。此說身往，非心緣往。或名趣生，對生有起故。
Furthermore, this intermediate state is known by various names. It is called the intermediate state because it arises in between death and rebirth. It is called 'gandharva' due to seeking fragrances and relying on fragrance. It is called 'manomaya' because it relies on the mind to move towards the place of rebirth. This refers to the body moving, not the mind's intentions moving. It is also called 'approaching birth' because it arises facing the new life.

當知中有除無色界一切生處。又造惡業者，謂屠羊雞猪等，隨其一類，由住不律儀眾同分故，作感那落迦惡不善業及增長已。
It should be known that the intermediate state exists in all realms of existence except for the formless realm. Also, those who have committed evil actions, such as slaughtering sheep, chickens, pigs, etc., belong to their respective category, due to residing in a group without discipline, thereby performing and amplifying unwholesome actions that lead to being reborn in the Naraka (hell) realms.

彼於爾時，猶如夢中，自於彼業所得生處，還見如是種類有情及屠羊等事。由先所習，喜樂馳趣，即於生處境色所礙，中有遂滅，生有續起。彼將沒時，如先死有，見紛亂色。如是乃至生滅道理，如前應知。
At that time, it is as though in a dream, they see themselves in the place of birth resultant from their actions, witnessing beings of similar kinds and acts of slaughtering sheep, etc. Due to preceding habits, they joyfully rush towards it, and upon encountering the obstructing circumstances of the place of birth, the intermediate state then ceases, and the continued existence arises. At the moment of their passing away, like in the previous state of death, they see chaotic forms. Thus, the principle of birth and cessation should be understood as previously described.

又彼生時，唯是化生，六處具足。
Furthermore, upon their birth, it is solely through transformational birth, with all six sensory faculties fully developed.

復起是心，而往趣之。謂我與彼嬉戲受樂，習諸伎藝。彼於爾時顛倒，謂造種種事業，及觸冷熱。若離妄見，如是相貌尚無趣欲，何況往彼。若不往彼，便不應生。如於那落迦如是，於餘似那落迦鬼趣中生，當知亦爾，如癭鬼等。又於餘鬼、傍生、人等，及欲、色界天眾同分中將受生時，於當生處，見己同類可意有情，由此於彼起其欣欲，即往生處，便被拘礙。死生道理，如前應知。
Again, when such a mind arises and is directed towards it. Thinking, "I will play and enjoy pleasure with them, learn various arts." At that time, in confusion, they commit various actions and experience sensations of cold and heat. If one is free from wrong views, such appearances still have no desire directed towards them, let alone moving towards it. If one does not move towards it, then one should not be born. As in the case with the Naraka realms, it should be understood that the same applies when being born into realms similar to the Naraka or ghost realms, like being a yakṣa, etc. Also, when about to be born into other ghostly realms, adjacent births, human, or in the desire and form realm celestial beings, at the place of intended birth, seeing their own kind and desirable beings, from this, they develop joy towards it and move towards the place of birth, then being constrained there. The principle of death and birth should be understood as described before.

又由三處現前，得入母胎。一、其母調適，而復值時；二、父母和合，俱起愛染；三、健達縛正現在前。
Furthermore, entry into the mother's womb is facilitated by the manifestation of three conditions: 1) the mother being in a suitable state and also at the right time; 2) the harmonious union of the parents, with both experiencing attachment; 3) the gandharva (intermediate being) being present right there.

復無三種障礙。謂產處過患所作，種子過患所作，宿業過患所作。
Additionally, there are three kinds of obstacles that are absent: namely, obstacles arising from afflictions concerning the place of birth, obstacles arising from afflictions concerning the seed, and obstacles arising from afflictions due to past actions.

云何產處過患？謂若產處為風熱癊之所逼迫；或於其中有麻麥果；或復其門如車螺形，有形有曲，有穢有濁。如是等類，產處過患應知。
What are afflictions concerning the place of birth? These refer to situations where the place of birth is afflicted by pressures of wind and heat illnesses; or where there are poppy seeds present; or where the entrance is shaped like a turban snail, having form and curvature, and is filthy and murky. Such types should be understood as afflictions concerning the place of birth.

云何種子過患？謂父出不淨非母，或母非父，或俱不出；或父精朽爛，或母，或俱。如是等類，種子過患應知。
What are afflictions concerning the seed? This refers to situations where the father's emission is impure and not from the mother, or the mother's is not from the father, or both are not emitted; or where the father's semen is decayed, or the mother's, or both. Such types should be understood as afflictions concerning the seed.

云何宿業過患？謂或父或母不作、不增長感子之業，或復俱無。或彼有情不作、不增長感父母業。或彼父母作及增長感餘子業。或彼有情作及增長感餘父母業。或感大宗葉業。或感非大宗葉業。如是等類，宿業過患應知。
What are afflictions due to past actions? This refers to situations where either the father or the mother does not perform, nor enhances, the karma for conceiving a child, or both are non-performant. Or the being itself does not perform or enhance the karma for obtaining parents. Or the parents perform and enhance the karma for conceiving other children. Or the being performs and enhances the karma for obtaining different parents. Or it is influenced by the karma of a significant family lineage. Or it is influenced by karma not associated with a significant family lineage. Such types should be understood as afflictions due to past actions.

若無如是三種過患，三處現前，得入母胎。彼即於中有處，自見與己同類有情為嬉戲等。於所生處起希趣欲。
If there are no such three kinds of afflictions, and the three conditions are present, entry into the mother's womb is facilitated. There, in the intermediate state, one sees beings of the same kind engaging in play and so forth. A desire to move towards the place of birth arises.

彼於爾時，見其父母共行邪行所出精血而起顛倒。起顛倒者，謂見父母為邪行時，不謂父母行此邪行，乃起倒覺、見己自行。見自行已，便起貪愛。若當欲為女，彼即於父便起會貪；若當欲為男，彼即於母起貪亦爾。乃往逼趣。若女於母，欲其遠去；若男於父，心亦復爾。生此欲已，或唯見男，或唯見女。如如漸近彼之處所，如是如是漸漸不見父母餘分，唯見男女根門。即於此處便被拘礙。死生道理，如是應知。
At that time, upon seeing the seminal fluid and blood resulting from the sexual union of the parents, one becomes deluded. The delusion arises from seeing the parents engaging in sexual acts, not recognizing them as one’s parents performing these acts, but rather perceiving oneself as participating. Upon this perception, desire and attachment arise. If destined to be female, attachment towards the father arises immediately; if destined to be male, attachment towards the mother arises similarly. Thus, one is drawn towards it. If female, there is a desire for the mother to go away; if male, the same sentiment is directed towards the father. Once this desire arises, one sees only the male or only the female. As one approaches closer to that place, the rest of the parents’ form gradually becomes invisible, seeing only the genital area. Then, at this site, one becomes constrained. The principle of death and birth should be known in this manner.

若薄福者，當生下賤家。彼於死時及入胎時，便聞種種紛亂之聲，及自妄見入於叢林、竹𥯤、蘆𥭳等中。若多福者，當生尊貴家。彼於爾時，便自聞有寂靜美妙可意音聲，及自妄見昇宮殿等可意相現。
If one has scant merit, one will be born into a humble family. At the time of death and entering the womb, one immediately hears various chaotic sounds and falsely perceives oneself entering into thickets, bamboo groves, reed beds, etc. If one possesses abundant merit, one will be born into a noble family. At that time, one immediately hears silent, pleasant, agreeable sounds by oneself, and falsely perceives ascending into palaces and other desirable forms.

爾時父母貪愛俱極，最後決定各出一滴濃厚精血。二滴和合住母胎中，合為一段。猶如熟乳凝結之時。當於此處，一切種子異熟所攝執受所依阿賴耶識和合依託。
At that time, the desire and attachment of both parents reach their peak, and finally, each emits a drop of thick seminal fluid and blood. The two drops merge in the mother's womb, forming a mass, similar to the moment when boiled milk coagulates. At this place, all seeds, encompassed and supported by the ālāyavijñāna that grasps and relies on the ripening of karmic consequences, come together and rely on it.

云何和合依託？
What is meant by merging and reliance?

謂此所出濃厚精血合成一段，與顛倒緣中有俱滅。與滅同時，即由一切種子識功能力故，有餘微細根及大種和合而生，及餘有根同分精血和合摶生。
It means that the thick seminal fluid and blood emitted here form a mass, which, along with the deluded Intermediate State being, ceases together. Simultaneously with this cessation, due to the functional power of the consciousness of all seeds, the remaining subtle senses and major constituents merge and arise, as well as the combination and coalescence of other sensory faculties with the seminal fluid and blood of the same kind.

於此時中，說識已住結生相續。即此名為羯羅藍位。此羯羅藍中，有諸根大種、唯與身根及根所依處大種俱生。即由此身根俱生諸根大種力故，眼等諸根次第當生。又由此身根俱生根所依處大種力故，諸根依處次第當生。由彼諸根及所依處具足生故，名得圓滿依止成就。
During this period, it is stated that consciousness is established, marking the continuation of existence. This is referred to as the 'kalala' stage. In this kalala stage, the major components of the faculties, exclusively along with the body faculty and the major components of the bases dependent on the faculty, arise simultaneously. Due to the force of the major components of the body faculty arising together, the eyes and other sensory faculties will sequentially come into existence. Furthermore, because of the force of the major components of the bases dependent on the body faculty arising together, the sites reliant on these faculties will sequentially come into existence. With the full development of these faculties and their reliant bases, this is termed achieving complete and perfected support and accomplishment.

又此羯羅藍色，與心心所安危共同，故名依託。
Furthermore, the color of this kalala, being in accord with the comfort and danger experienced by the mind and mental factors, is therefore called the basis of reliance.

由心心所依託力故，色不爛壞；色損益故，彼亦損益；是故說彼安危共同。
Additionally, the appearance of this kalala is in harmony with the well-being and peril of the mind and mental phenomena, hence it is referred to as the foundation of reliance.

又此羯羅藍識最初託處，即名肉心。如是識於此處最初託，即從此處最後捨。
Furthermore, the kalala, as the initial place where consciousness resides, is known as the 'flesh heart.' In this manner, consciousness initially takes residence at this spot and ultimately departs from it as well.

後序
Epilogue

中書令臣許敬宗製
Composed by Minister Xu Jingzong, Director of the Palace Library

原夫三才成位，爰彰開闢之端；六羽為君，猶昧尊卑之序。訊餘軌於襄陸，淪胥靡徵；考陳跡於懷英，寂寥無紀。暨乎黃軒振武，玄頊疏功；帝道盛於唐虞，王業著於殷夏。葳蕤玉冊，照耀金圖；茂範曾芬，詳諸歷選。然則基神襲聖，衍慶摛和；軼三代而孤標，掩百王而逈秀。我大唐皇帝。無得而稱矣！斷鼇初載，萬有於是宅心；飛龍在辰，六幽於是仰德。偃洪流而恢地絡，練清氣而緝天維。散服韜戈，扇無為之道；移澆反璞，弘不言之化。悠悠庶類，叶夢於華胥；蠢蠢懷生，遂性於仁壽。大禮大樂，包曲臺而掩宣榭；宏謨宏典，澄璧水而藻環林。瑞露禎雲，翊紫空而表貺；祥鱗慶翼，繞丹禁而呈符。歲精所記之州，咸為疆埸；暄谷所謨之縣，並入隄封。廣闢轅宮，被文軌於殊俗；還開姬弈，均正朔於王會。大業成矣！大化清矣！於是遊心羽陵，寓情延閣，總萬篋於天縱，資一貫於生知；洞照神襟，深窮性道。俯同小伎，則絢發三辰；降習微毫，則妙逾八體。居域中之大寶，畢天下之能事。雖則甲夜觀書，見稱優洽；華旦成曲，獨擅風猷。仰挍鴻徽，豈可同年而語矣！有玄奘法師者，胎彰辯慧，躡身子之高蹤；生稟神奇。嗣摩什之芳軌。爰初束髮，即事抽簪；逈出蓋纏，深悟空假。研求四諦，嗟謬旨於真宗；鑽仰一乘，鑒訛文於實相。遂迺發弘誓願，起大悲心；思拯迷途，親尋正教。幸屬時康道泰，遠安邇肅，裂裳裹足，直趣迦維，闡皇澤於遐方，徵釋教於前域。越葱嶺之外，猶跬步而忘遠；遵竹園之左，譬親受而何殊。訪道周遊十有七載，經途所亘百有餘國。異方之語，資一音而並貫；未譯之經，罄五財而畢寫。若誦若閱，喻青蓮之受持；半句半偈，隨白馬而俱返。以貞觀十九年，持如來肉舍利一百五十粒、佛像七軀、三藏聖教要文凡六百五十七部，二月六日還至長安，奉勅於弘福寺安置，令所司供給，召諸名僧二十一人學通內外者，共譯持來三藏梵本；至二十一年五月十五日，肇譯瑜伽師地論。論梵本四萬頌，頌三十二字，凡有五分，宗明十七地義。三藏法師玄奘，敬執梵文譯為唐語；弘福寺沙門靈會、靈雋、智開、知仁，會昌寺沙門玄度，瑤臺寺沙門道卓，大總持寺沙門道觀，清禪寺沙門明覺，烝義筆受；弘福寺沙門玄謨，證梵語；大總持寺沙門玄應，正字；大總持寺沙門道洪，實際寺沙門明琰，寶昌寺沙門法祥，羅漢寺沙門惠貴，弘福寺沙門文備，蒲州栖巖寺沙門神泰，廓州法講寺沙門道深，詳證大義。本地分中，五識身相應地、意地、有尋有伺地、無尋唯伺地、無尋無伺地，凡十七卷，普光寺沙門道智，受旨證文；三摩呬多地、非三摩呬多地、有心無心地、聞所成地、思所成地、修所成地，凡十卷，蒲州普救寺沙門行友，受旨證文；聲聞地初、瑜伽種姓地盡第二瑜伽處，凡九卷，玄法寺沙門玄賾，受旨證文；聲聞地第三瑜伽處盡獨覺地，凡五卷，汴州真諦寺沙門玄忠，受旨證文；菩薩地、有餘依地、無餘依地，凡十六卷。簡州福眾寺沙門靖邁，受旨證文；攝決擇分，凡三十卷，大總持寺沙門辯機，受旨證文；攝異門分、攝釋分，凡四卷，普光寺沙門處衡，受旨證文；攝事分，十六卷，弘福寺沙門明濬，受旨證文銀青光祿大夫行太子左庶子高陽縣開國男臣許敬宗奉詔監閱，至二十二年五月十五日。絕筆，總成一百卷。佛滅度後，彌勒菩薩自覩史多天宮。降于中印度阿瑜他國，為無著菩薩之所說也。斯固法門極地，該三藏之遺文；如來後心暢五乘之奧旨。玄宗微妙不可思議，僧徒並戒行圓深，道業貞固。欣承嘉召，得奉高人，各罄幽心，共稟新義。隨畢奏上，有感宸衷；爰降殊恩，親裁鴻序。情超繫象，理絕名言。皇太子分耀黃離，纘基青陸，北搖傳樂，仰金聲而竊愧；東明御辯，瞻玉裕而多慚。九載勤經，漢儲斯陋；一朝成賦，魏兩韜英。既睹天文，頂戴無已；爰抽祕藻，讚歎功德。紆二聖之仙詞，闡三藏之幽鍵。載揚佛日，式導玄津，開夏景於蓮華，法流逾潔；泛春光於貝葉，道樹增輝。冀夫聖藻長懸，與天地而無極；真如廣被，隨塵沙而不窮。凡厥含靈，知所歸矣！
In the beginning, the Three Powers established their positions, marking the inception of creation; yet the six types of rulers were still unclear about the order of rank and hierarchy. I sought further guidance in Xianglu, but found no clear signs; I explored the traces in Huaiying, only to find silence and no records. Then came the era of Emperor Huang and Emperor Xuan, who revitalized martial spirit and neglected achievements; the Way of the Emperor flourished in the times of Tang and Yu, and the undertakings of kings were prominent in the Yin and Xia dynasties. The jade decrees were brilliant, illuminating the golden charts; the extensive examples were fragrant, detailed in various historical selections. Thus, the foundation of divinity continued the sage lineage, extending blessings and harmonizing peace; surpassing the Three Dynasties in solitary prominence, eclipsing a hundred kings in distant excellence. Our Emperor of the Great Tang is beyond comparison! With the initial cutting of the turtle, everything resides in the heart; with the dragon flying in its proper time, even the six realms look up in respect. Leveling the vast currents to restore the earth's network, refining the clear qi to mend the heavens' fabric. Dispelling armor and weapons, promoting the Way of non-action; transforming the adulterated back to purity, amplifying the transformation of unspoken influence. The multitude of beings, partake in the dream of Hua Xu; stirring with life, naturally inclined towards kindness and longevity. Grand ceremonies and great joy envelop the Qu Platform and conceal the Xuan Pavilion; magnificent plans and grand canons clear the Bi Waters and decorate the surrounding forests. Auspicious dew and blessed clouds, bestow gifts under the purple sky; fortunate scales and celebratory wings, present tokens around the vermilion prohibition. The excellences of the years are recorded by the states, all becoming boundaries; the planning of warm valleys is contemplated by the counties, all entering protections. Expanding the gates of the palace, adorning with literary tracks in foreign customs; reopening the games of Ji and Yi, equalizing the calendar in royal gatherings. The great undertaking is accomplished! The great transformation is clear! Thus, roaming in thought over Feathered Mounts, lodging emotions in Extended Pavilions, collecting myriad chests from heaven’s bestowals, drawing upon a single thread of living knowledge; penetrating the divine core, delving deeply into the nature of the Way. Lowering to engage with minor skills, thus the brilliance of the Three Lights emerged; descending to practice the minutest details, thus exceeding the Eight Forms became wonderful. Possessing the great treasures within the realm, accomplishing everything under the sky. Though observing books by the armor at night, recognizing excellence and harmony; composing tunes at dawn, uniquely mastering styles and methods. Looking up to the vast emblems, how could one speak of the same era! There was Master Xuanzang, who was brilliant in wisdom from the womb, following the great footsteps of Śubhakarasiṃha; born with divine marvels, inheriting the fragrant tracks of Mahāyāna. From the beginning of hair-tying, he dealt with removing pins; stepping out of worldly entanglements, he deeply understood emptiness and provisionality. Investigating the Four Noble Truths, lamenting over the deviations from the true doctrine; aspiring towards the One Vehicle, discerning the erroneous texts in search of true characteristics. Thus, he set forth a great vow, aroused by great compassion; thinking to rescue those lost, he personally sought the correct teachings. Fortunate to live in a time of peace and great order, distant serenity and near solemnity, tearing his garments and binding his feet, he headed straight for Kāpilavastu, spreading imperial grace to distant lands, seeking Buddhist teachings in ancient domains. Beyond the Onion Ranges, yet considering each step not far; following to the left of the Bamboo Garden, like personally receiving teachings without difference. Seeking the Way and traveling for seventeen years, crossing over a hundred countries en route. The languages of foreign lands, connected by a single sound; the yet untranslated scriptures, thoroughly recorded by exhausting resources. Whether chanting or reading, resembling the accepting of the Blue Lotus; a half sentence or half verse, returning together with the White Horse. In the nineteenth year of the Zhenguan era, carrying 150 śarīra relics of the Tathāgata, seven Buddha statues, and essential texts of the Tripitaka totaling 657 parts, on the sixth day of the second month, he returned to Chang'an. By imperial command, he was settled in Hongfu Temple, provided for by the authorities, summoning twenty-one renowned monks proficient in both internal and external studies, collectively translating the Tripitaka Sanskrit originals brought with him; starting on the fifteenth day of the fifth month of the twenty-first year, beginning the translation of the Yogācārabhūmi Śāstra. The Śāstra, in its Sanskrit original, comprises 40,000 ślokas, each śloka containing thirty-two characters, in total dividing into five parts, elucidating the meanings of the seventeen grounds. Tripitaka Master Xuanzang, respectfully holding the Sanskrit text, translated it into the Tang language; Hongfu Temple monks Linghui, Lingjuan, Zhikai, Zhiren, Huichang Temple monk Xuandu, Yaotai Temple monk Daozhuo, Dazongchi Temple monk Daoguan, Qingchan Temple monk Mingjue received the dictation; Hongfu Temple monk Xuanmo verified the Sanskrit; Dazongchi Temple monk Xuan应 checked the characters; Dazongchi Temple monk Daohong, Shiji Temple monk Mingyan, Baochang Temple monk Faxiang, Luohan Temple monk Huigui, Hongfu Temple monk Wenbei, Puzhou Qixian Temple monk Shentai, Kuozhou Fajiang Temple monk Daoshen verified the great meanings. In the basic section, the five consciousness-associated realms, the mind realm, the realm with searching and watching, the realm with neither searching nor only watching, the realm with neither searching nor watching, totaling seventeen volumes, Puguang Temple monk Daozhi received the command to verify the texts; the Samādhi realm, the non-Samādhi realm, realms with and without mind, realms established through hearing, thinking, and cultivating, totaling ten volumes, Puzhou Pujiu Temple monk Xingyou received the command to verify the texts; the initial Śrāvaka realm through to the end of the second Yoga position in the Yogācāra lineage, totaling nine volumes, Xuanfa Temple monk Xuanze received the command to verify the texts; from the third Yoga position in the Śrāvaka realm through to the Pratyekabuddha realm, totaling five volumes, Bianzhou Zhen Temple monk Xuanzhong received the command to verify the texts; the Bodhisattva realm, the realm with residue, the realm without residue, totaling sixteen volumes. Jianzhou Fuzhong Temple monk Jingmai received the command to verify the texts; the selection of decisive parts, totaling thirty volumes, Dazongchi Temple monk Bianji received the command to verify the texts; the collection of different schools part, the collection of explanation part, totaling four volumes, Puguang Temple monk Chuheng received the command to verify the texts; the collection of practices part, sixteen volumes, Hongfu Temple monk Mingjun received the command to verify the text Silver and Green Guanglu Grand Officer, Acting Crown Prince Left Shuzi, Gaoyang County founding nobleman Minister Xu Jingzong respectfully received the imperial command to supervise the review, until the fifteenth day of the fifth month of the twenty-second year. Conclusion, totaling one hundred volumes. After the Buddha's parinirvāṇa, Maitreya Bodhisattva, himself visualizing from the Tushita Heavenly Palace. Descending in central India, in the country of Ayodhya, it was spoken by Asaṅga Bodhisattva. This indeed is the extreme realm of dharma, encompassing the remnant texts of the Tripitaka; the Tathāgata's later mind elaborates the profound principles of the five vehicles. The profound mysteries are incomprehensible, both monks and lay practitioners deeply follow the precepts and conduct, steadfast in their path and virtue. Joyfully receiving the noble call, inaugurating the sublime, each exhausts their hidden minds, collectively adopting the new teachings. Following the completion of the report, feeling moved in the imperial heart; hence bestowing special grace, personally drafting the grand preface. Emotions surpass the binding images, principles transcend spoken words. The Crown Prince shines forth like yellow amber, gathering the foundation on azure land, shaking the north with transmitted music, looking up at the golden sounds with secret shame; brightening the east with imperial eloquence, gazing at the jade abundance with much embarrassment. Nine years of diligent study, Han's storehouse is humble; one morning's completed poem, Wei's double talents shine. Having seen celestial patterns, the admiration is endless; extracting secret algae, praising virtues and merits. Winding around the immortal phrases of the two saints, elucidating the hidden keys of the Tripitaka. Carrying forth the Buddha's day, leading the way to the profound ford, opening summer scenes with lotus flowers, the dharma flows even more purely; spreading spring light on palm leaves, the path of the dao brightens further. Hoping that the sacred algae hangs long, limitless as heaven and earth; the suchness broadly covers, following the dust and sand without end. Everything endowed with spirit knows its return.

瑜伽師地論卷第一
Yogācārabhūmi Śāstra, Volume One
