#----------------------------------------------------------------------
#【經文資訊】大正新脩大藏經 第 49 冊 No. 2030 大阿羅漢難提蜜多羅所說法住記
#【版本記錄】發行日期：2024-01，最後更新：2022-10-15
#【編輯說明】本資料庫由 財團法人佛教電子佛典基金會（CBETA）依「大正新脩大藏經」所編輯
#【原始資料】蕭鎮國大德提供，北美某大德提供
#【其他事項】本資料庫可自由免費流通，詳細內容請參閱【財團法人佛教電子佛典基金會資料庫版權宣告】
#----------------------------------------------------------------------

No. 2030
大阿羅漢難提蜜多羅所說法住記
Record of the Teachings Abiding in the Dharma as Spoken by the Great Arhat Nandimitra

大唐三藏法師玄奘奉詔譯
Translation by Tripitaka Master Xuanzang by Imperial Decree

如是傳聞。佛薄伽梵般涅槃後八百年中。執師子國勝軍王都。有阿羅漢名難提蜜多羅(唐言慶友)。具八解脫三明六通無諍願智邊際定等。無量功德皆悉具足。有大威神名稱高遠。以願智力能知此界一切有情種種心行。復能隨順作諸饒益。化緣既畢將般涅槃。集諸苾芻苾芻尼等。說己所證諸妙功德。及應所行利樂有情。諸勝事業皆悉成辦。告時眾曰。自今已後無復所為。唯無餘依是所歸趣。仁等當知有疑可問。時諸大眾聞是語已。舉聲號哭不能自持宛轉於地。或起唱言佛薄伽梵久已涅槃。諸聖弟子亦隨寂滅。世間久空無真調御。今唯尊者為天人眼。如何復欲棄捨我等。願垂哀愍少留壽命。尊者慶友慰喻眾言。不須啼泣。仁等當知世間法爾有生必滅。諸佛如來降伏四魔於壽自在。隨順世故猶示涅槃。況我今者豈宜恒住。設隨汝請亦無利益。當體此意勿生憂惱。但有疑者應可速問。諸苾芻等雖承告示。猶增涕噎良久乃問。我等未知世尊釋迦牟尼無上正法當住幾時。尊者告曰。汝等諦聽。如來先已說法住經。今當為汝粗更宣說。佛薄伽梵般涅槃時。以無上法付囑十六大阿羅漢并眷屬等。令其護持使不滅沒。及勅其身與諸施主作真福田。令彼施者得大果報。時諸大眾聞是語已少解憂悲。復重請言。所說十六大阿羅漢。我輩不知其名何等。慶友答言。第一尊者名賓度羅跋囉惰闍。第二尊者名迦諾迦伐蹉。第三尊者名迦諾迦跋釐墮闍。第四尊者名蘇頻陀。第五尊者名諾距羅。第六尊者名跋陀羅。第七尊者名迦理迦。第八尊者名伐闍羅弗多羅。第九尊者名戍博迦。第十尊者名半託迦。第十一尊者名囉怙羅。第十二尊者名那伽犀那。第十三尊者名因揭陀。第十四尊者名伐那婆斯。第十五尊者名阿氏多。第十六尊者名注荼半託迦。如是十六大阿羅漢。一切皆具三明六通八解脫等無量功德。離三界染誦持三藏博通外典。承佛勅故。以神通力延自壽量。乃至世尊正法應住常隨護持。及與施主作真福田。令彼施者得大果報。



如是傳聞。
Thus it is heard.

佛薄伽梵般涅槃後八百年中。
Eight hundred years after Buddha Bhagavan’s parinirvana,

執師子國勝軍王都。
in the capital of King Victory in Lion-Country,

有阿羅漢名難提蜜多羅(唐言慶友)。
there lived an Arhat named Nandimitra (in Tang, Xingyou).

具八解脫三明六通無諍願智邊際定等。
He possessed the Eight Liberations, the Three Knowledges, the Six Supernatural Powers, and the tranquil mind of nondisputation.

無量功德皆悉具足。
He was endowed with infinite virtues,

有大威神名稱高遠。
great miraculous powers, and a lofty reputation.

以願智力能知此界一切有情種種心行。
Using the power of his wish and wisdom, he could understand the various minds and actions of all sentient beings in this world,

復能隨順作諸饒益。
and he could benefit them accordingly.

化緣既畢將般涅槃。
When his task was complete and he was about to enter parinirvana,

集諸苾芻苾芻尼等。
he gathered bhikshus and bhikshunis

說己所證諸妙功德。
and spoke of the profound virtues he had realized

及應所行利樂有情。
and the good deeds he had done to benefit sentient beings.

諸勝事業皆悉成辦。
All noble deeds fully accomplished,

告時眾曰。
he told the assembly,

自今已後無復所為。
“Henceforth I have nothing more to do,

唯無餘依是所歸趣。
only the remainderless nirvana is my refuge.

仁等當知有疑可問。
If you have any doubts, ask now.”

時諸大眾聞是語已。
The assembly, hearing these words,

舉聲號哭不能自持宛轉於地。
cried out loud, unable to control themselves, rolling on the ground.

或起唱言佛薄伽梵久已涅槃。
Others lamented, "Buddha Bhagavan has long parinirvana’d,

諸聖弟子亦隨寂滅。
his holy disciples also falling into silence.

世間久空無真調御。
The world has long been empty without a true guide.

今唯尊者為天人眼。
Now only the Venerable remains as the eye of gods and humans.

如何復欲棄捨我等。
How can you abandon us?

願垂哀愍少留壽命。
We beseech you to stay a little longer out of compassion.”

尊者慶友慰喻眾言。
The Venerable Nandimitra consoled them,

不須啼泣。
saying, “No need to weep.

仁等當知世間法爾有生必滅。
You should know all phenomena in this world are bound to be born and to perish.

諸佛如來降伏四魔於壽自在。
Even the Buddhas, having conquered the four Maras, choose their time to pass.

隨順世故猶示涅槃。
In accord with worldly conditions, they demonstrate parinirvana.

況我今者豈宜恒住。
How then could I, devoid of such grandeur, stay forever?

設隨汝請亦無利益。
Even if I were to heed your plea, it would bear no lasting benefit.

當體此意勿生憂惱。
Grasp this truth and worry not.

但有疑者應可速問。
If you have doubts, ask them swiftly.”

諸苾芻等雖承告示。
Though the bhikshus accepted his words,

猶增涕噎良久乃問。
their sobbing grew, and after a while, they asked,

我等未知世尊釋迦牟尼無上正法當住幾時。
“We do not know how long the supreme Right Dharma of the World-Honored One Shakyamuni will endure.”

尊者告曰。
The Venerable replied,

汝等諦聽。
“Listen carefully.

如來先已說法住經。
The Tathagata had already spoken the Sutra of Dharma Abiding.

今當為汝粗更宣說。
Now, I will elaborate it to you again.

佛薄伽梵般涅槃時。
When Buddha Bhagavan parinirvana’d,

以無上法付囑十六大阿羅漢并眷屬等。
he entrusted the supreme Dharma to sixteen great Arhats and their retinues.

令其護持使不滅沒。
He instructed them to guard and keep it from perishing.

及勅其身與諸施主作真福田。
He commanded them to be fields of merit for donors,

令彼施者得大果報。
so donors could reap great rewards.

時諸大眾聞是語已少解憂悲。
The assembly, hearing these words, lessened their sorrow a little.

復重請言。
They further asked,

所說十六大阿羅漢。
“You mentioned sixteen great Arhats.

我輩不知其名何等。
We do not know their names.

慶友答言。
Nandimitra replied,

第一尊者名賓度羅跋囉惰闍。
“The first Venerable is named Bindulabharadraja.

第二尊者名迦諾迦伐蹉。
The second Venerable is named Kanakavattsa.

第三尊者名迦諾迦跋釐墮闍。
The third Venerable is named Kanakabharadravaja.

第四尊者名蘇頻陀。
The fourth Venerable is named Subinda.

第五尊者名諾距羅。
The fifth Venerable is named Norura.

第六尊者名跋陀羅。
The sixth Venerable is named Bhadra.

第七尊者名迦理迦。
The seventh Venerable is named Kalika.

第八尊者名伐闍羅弗多羅。
The eighth Venerable is named Vajraputra.

第九尊者名戍博迦。
The ninth Venerable is named Subhaga.

第十尊者名半託迦。
The tenth Venerable is named Pantaka.

第十一尊者名囉怙羅。
The eleventh Venerable is named Rahula.

第十二尊者名那伽犀那。
The twelfth Venerable is named Nagashina.

第十三尊者名因揭陀。
The thirteenth Venerable is named Ingata.

第十四尊者名伐那婆斯。
The fourteenth Venerable is named Vanavasin.

第十五尊者名阿氏多。
The fifteenth Venerable is named Asita.

第十六尊者名注荼半託迦。
The sixteenth Venerable is named Cudapanthaka.

如是十六大阿羅漢。
These sixteen great Arhats,

一切皆具三明六通八解脫等無量功德。
each endowed with the Three Knowledges, Six Supernatural Powers, Eight Liberations, and infinite virtues,

離三界染誦持三藏博通外典。
detached from the defilements of the Three Realms, versed in the Tripitaka and other texts.

承佛勅故。
Following the Buddha’s command,

以神通力延自壽量。
they use their supernatural power to extend their lives,

乃至世尊正法應住常隨護持。
always protecting the Right Dharma as long as it abides.

及與施主作真福田。
They serve as true fields of merit for donors,

令彼施者得大果報。
enabling donors to attain great rewards.



爾時苾芻苾芻尼等。復重請言。我等不知十六尊者多住何處。護持正法饒益有情。慶友答言。第一尊者與自眷屬千阿羅漢。多分住在西瞿陀尼洲。第二尊者與自眷屬五百阿羅漢。多分住北方迦濕彌羅國。第三尊者與自眷屬六百阿羅漢。多分住在東勝身洲。第四尊者與自眷屬七百阿羅漢。多分住在北俱盧洲。第五尊者與自眷屬八百阿羅漢。多分住在南贍部洲。第六尊者與自眷屬九百阿羅漢。多分住在耽沒羅洲。第七尊者與自眷屬千阿羅漢。多分住在僧伽荼洲。第八尊者與自眷屬千一百阿羅漢。多分住在鉢剌拏洲。第九尊者與自眷屬九百阿羅漢。多分住在香醉山中。第十尊者與自眷屬千三百阿羅漢。多分住在三十三天。第十一尊者與自眷屬千一百阿羅漢。多分住在畢利颺瞿洲。第十二尊者與自眷屬千二百阿羅漢。多分住在半度波山。第十三尊者與自眷屬千三百阿羅漢。多分住在廣脇山中。第十四尊者與自眷屬千四百阿羅漢。多分住在可住山中。第十五尊者與自眷屬千五百阿羅漢。多分住在鷲峯山中。第十六尊者與自眷屬千六百阿羅漢。多分住在持軸山中。諸仁者若此世界。一切國王輔相大臣長者居士。若男若女發殷淨心。為四方僧設大施會。或設五年無遮施會。或慶寺慶像慶經幡等施設大會。或延請僧至所住處設大福會。或詣寺中經行處等。安布上妙諸坐臥具。衣藥飲食奉施僧眾。時此十六大阿羅漢。及諸眷屬隨其所應分散往赴。現種種形蔽隱聖儀。同常凡眾密受供具。令諸施主得勝果報。如是十六大阿羅漢。護持正法饒益有情。至此南贍部洲人壽極短至於十歲。刀兵劫起互相誅戮。佛法爾時當暫滅沒。刀兵劫後人壽漸增至百歲位。此洲人等厭前刀兵殘害苦惱復樂修善。時此十六大阿羅漢。與諸眷屬復來人中。稱揚顯說無上正法。度無量眾令其出家。為諸有情作饒益事。如是乃至此洲人壽六萬歲時。無上正法流行世間熾然無息。後至人壽七萬歲時。無上正法方永滅沒。時此十六大阿羅漢。與諸眷屬於此洲地俱來集會。以神通力用諸七寶造窣堵波嚴麗高廣。釋迦牟尼如來應正等覺。所有遺身馱都皆集其內。爾時十六大阿羅漢。與諸眷屬繞窣堵波以諸香花持用供養恭敬讚歎。繞百千匝瞻仰禮已。俱昇虛空向窣堵波作如是言。敬禮世尊釋迦如來應正等覺。我受教勅護持正法。及與天人作諸饒益。法藏已沒有緣已周今辭滅度。說是語已一時俱入無餘涅槃。先定願力火起焚身。如燈焰滅骸骨無遺。時窣堵波便陷入地。至金輪際方乃停住。爾時世尊釋迦牟尼無上正法。於此三千大千世界永滅不現。從此無聞此佛土中有七萬俱胝獨覺一時出現。至人壽量八萬歲時。獨覺聖眾復皆滅度。次後彌勒如來應正等覺出現世間時贍部洲廣博嚴淨無諸荊棘谿谷堆埠。平正潤澤金沙覆地。處處皆有清池茂林名花瑞草及眾寶聚。更相輝映甚可愛樂。人皆慈心修行十善。以修善故壽命長遠豐樂安隱。士女殷稠城邑隣次鷄飛相及。所營農稼一種七穫。自然成實不須耘耨。諸仁者於彼時中。國界莊嚴有情果報陳之難盡。具如彌勒成佛經說。彌勒如來成正覺已。為聲聞眾三會說法令出生死得證涅槃。第一會度九十六俱胝聲聞眾。第二會度九十四俱胝聲聞眾。第三會度九十二俱胝聲聞眾。若諸國王大臣長者居士男女一切施主。於今釋迦牟尼佛正法中。能為佛事自種善根。或教他種謂以七寶金銀真珠璧玉香材鍮石銅鐵木石泥漆。或以繒縷或以彩畫。作佛形像及窣堵波。若大若小乃至最小如指節量。或以香花諸妙供具。若多若少而為供養。彼由如是善根力故。至彌勒如來成正覺時善得人身。於彼佛第一會中以淨信心捨俗出家剃除鬚髮披著法服既預聖眾。隨宿願力便得涅槃。是名第一為佛事故種善根者所得果報。若諸國王及以臣庶一切施主。於今釋迦牟尼佛正法中。能為法事自種善根。或教他種。謂於大乘素呾纜藏。所有甚深空性相應諸大乘經。謂般若波羅蜜多經。妙法芬陀利迦經。金光明經。金剛手藏經。首楞伽摩三摩地經。幻喻三摩地經。大神變三摩地經。集諸功德三摩地經。還如來智印三摩地經。具諸威光三摩地經。寶臺經集諸菩薩三摩地經。諸佛攝受經。集請問經。梵王問經善吉問經。勇猛問經。能滿問經。海龍王問經。無熱惱龍王問經。樹幢龍王問經。寶掌問經。寶髻問經。虛空音問經。虛空吼問經。幻網問經。寶女問經。妙女問經。善臂問經。師子問經。猛授問經。金光女問經。說無盡慧經。說無垢稱經。未生怨王經。諦實經。那羅延經。佛花嚴經。蓮華手經。十佛名經。無量光眾經。極樂眾經。集淨華經。大集經。入一切道經。寶幢經。寶聚經。寶篋經。彩畫經。高頂王經。如是等大乘經。有百俱胝部。黨差別復有大乘毘柰耶藏。阿毘達磨藏眾多部類。一切皆是菩薩藏攝。復有聲聞三藏。謂素怛纜藏。毘柰耶藏。阿毘達磨藏。素怛纜藏。有五阿笈摩。謂長阿笈摩。中阿笈摩。增一阿笈摩。相應阿笈摩。雜類阿笈摩。毘柰耶藏中有苾芻戒經苾芻尼戒經。分別戒本諸蘊差別及增一律。阿毘達磨藏中。有攝六問相應發趣等。眾多部類。復有本生鬘讚獨覺鬘讚。於如是等正法藏中。或是佛說或菩薩說或聲聞說或諸仙說。或諸天說或智者說。能引義利乃至有能。於四句頌。若自誦若教他誦。若自讀若教他讀。若自持若教他持。若自解說若教他解說。或於法師恭敬供養。或於經卷恭敬供養。謂以種種香花幡蓋伎樂燈明而為供養。或於經卷以諸雜綵囊帊縷帶而嚴飾之。由如是等善根力故。至彌勒如來成正覺時善現人身。於彼佛第二會中。以淨信心捨離家法。出趣非家。淨除鬚髮披著法服既預聖眾。隨宿願力便得涅槃。是名第二為法事故種善根者所得果報。



爾時苾芻苾芻尼等。
At that time, the bhikshus and bhikshunis

復重請言。
asked again,

我等不知十六尊者多住何處。
“We do not know where the sixteen venerable ones reside,

護持正法饒益有情。
and how they protect the Right Dharma and benefit sentient beings.”

慶友答言。
Nandimitra replied,

第一尊者與自眷屬千阿羅漢。
“The first venerable, with his retinue of a thousand Arhats,

多分住在西瞿陀尼洲。
mostly resides in the Western Guna Island.

第二尊者與自眷屬五百阿羅漢。
The second venerable, with his retinue of five hundred Arhats,

多分住北方迦濕彌羅國。
mostly resides in the northern country of Kashmir.

第三尊者與自眷屬六百阿羅漢。
The third venerable, with his retinue of six hundred Arhats,

多分住在東勝身洲。
mostly resides in the Eastern Exalted Body Island.

第四尊者與自眷屬七百阿羅漢。
The fourth venerable, with his retinue of seven hundred Arhats,

多分住在北俱盧洲。
mostly resides in the Northern Kuru Continent.

第五尊者與自眷屬八百阿羅漢。
The fifth venerable, with his retinue of eight hundred Arhats,

多分住在南贍部洲。
mostly resides in the Southern Jambudvipa.

第六尊者與自眷屬九百阿羅漢。
The sixth venerable, with his retinue of nine hundred Arhats,

多分住在耽沒羅洲。
mostly resides in the Timira Continent.

第七尊者與自眷屬千阿羅漢。
The seventh venerable, with his retinue of a thousand Arhats,

多分住在僧伽荼洲。
mostly resides in the Sangata Continent.

第八尊者與自眷屬千一百阿羅漢。
The eighth venerable, with his retinue of eleven hundred Arhats,

多分住在鉢剌拏洲。
mostly resides in the Phalaka Continent.

第九尊者與自眷屬九百阿羅漢。
The ninth venerable, with his retinue of nine hundred Arhats,

多分住在香醉山中。
mostly resides in Fragrant Drunken Mountain.

第十尊者與自眷屬千三百阿羅漢。
The tenth venerable, with his retinue of thirteen hundred Arhats,

多分住在三十三天。
mostly resides in the Heaven of the Thirty-Three.

第十一尊者與自眷屬千一百阿羅漢。
The eleventh venerable, with his retinue of eleven hundred Arhats,

多分住在畢利颺瞿洲。
mostly resides in the Bilivang Continent.

第十二尊者與自眷屬千二百阿羅漢。
The twelfth venerable, with his retinue of twelve hundred Arhats,

多分住在半度波山。
mostly resides in Mount Pandopa.

第十三尊者與自眷屬千三百阿羅漢。
The thirteenth venerable, with his retinue of thirteen hundred Arhats,

多分住在廣脇山中。
mostly resides in the Broad Flank Mountain.

第十四尊者與自眷屬千四百阿羅漢。
The fourteenth venerable, with his retinue of fourteen hundred Arhats,

多分住在可住山中。
mostly resides in Dwelling Mountain.

第十五尊者與自眷屬千五百阿羅漢。
The fifteenth venerable, with his retinue of fifteen hundred Arhats,

多分住在鷲峯山中。
mostly resides in Vulture Peak.

第十六尊者與自眷屬千六百阿羅漢。
The sixteenth venerable, with his retinue of sixteen hundred Arhats,

多分住在持軸山中。
mostly resides in Mount Chizhu.

諸仁者若此世界。
Reverent ones, if in this world,

一切國王輔相大臣長者居士。
all kings, ministers, elders, and householders,

若男若女發殷淨心。
whether men or women, generate profound pure faith,

為四方僧設大施會。
and arrange grand offerings for the monks of the four quarters,

或設五年無遮施會。
or hold unimpeded offerings every five years,

或慶寺慶像慶經幡等施設大會。
or organize ceremonies for temples, statues, and sutras,

或延請僧至所住處設大福會。
or invite monks to their homes and hold great merit gatherings,

或詣寺中經行處等。
or go to monasteries and walking places,

安布上妙諸坐臥具。
and offer superior seats and beds,

衣藥飲食奉施僧眾。
clothing, medicine, and food to the monastic community,

時此十六大阿羅漢及諸眷屬隨其所應分散往赴。
then these sixteen great Arhats and their retinues would commonly respond and attend,

現種種形蔽隱聖儀。
appearing in various forms, concealing their holy characteristics,

同常凡眾密受供具。
mingling with common folks to secretly receive the offerings,

令諸施主得勝果報。
enabling donors to attain superior results.

如是十六大阿羅漢護持正法饒益有情。
These sixteen great Arhats protect the Right Dharma and benefit sentient beings.

至此南贍部洲人壽極短至於十歲。
Until in the Southern Jambudvipa, the life span shortens to ten years,

刀兵劫起互相誅戮。
and an era of weapons arises, leading to mutual slaughter.

佛法爾時當暫滅沒。
At that time, the Buddha Dharma will temporarily disappear.

刀兵劫後人壽漸增至百歲位。
After the era of weapons, the life span gradually increases to a hundred years.

此洲人等厭前刀兵殘害苦惱復樂修善。
People, weary of previous suffering and harm from warfare, turn to joyful practice of virtue.

時此十六大阿羅漢。
Then these sixteen great Arhats,

與諸眷屬復來人中。
along with their retinues, return to the human realm,

稱揚顯說無上正法。
to proclaim and teach the supreme Right Dharma.

度無量眾令其出家。
They liberate countless beings, leading them to renounce household life.

為諸有情作饒益事。
They act to benefit sentient beings.

如是乃至此洲人壽六萬歲時。
Thus, until the life span in this continent reaches sixty thousand years,

無上正法流行世間熾然無息。
the supreme Right Dharma flourishes in the world like a blazing fire that does not cease.

後至人壽七萬歲時。
Later, when the life span reaches seventy thousand years,

無上正法方永滅沒。
the supreme Right Dharma finally perishes forever.

時此十六大阿羅漢與諸眷屬於此洲地俱來集會。
At that time, these sixteen great Arhats, along with their retinues, gather together in this land.

以神通力用諸七寶造窣堵波嚴麗高廣。
By their supernatural power, they construct a resplendent and vast stupa adorned with seven treasures,

釋迦牟尼如來應正等覺所有遺身馱都皆集其內。
containing all the relics of Shakyamuni Tathagata’s body.

爾時十六大阿羅漢與諸眷屬繞窣堵波以諸香花持用供養恭敬讚歎。
At that time, the sixteen great Arhats and their retinues circumambulate the stupa, offering incense and flowers, reverently praising.

繞百千匝瞻仰禮已。
After circumambulating hundreds and thousands of times and paying respectful homage,

俱昇虛空向窣堵波作如是言。
they ascend to the sky and speak towards the stupa,

敬禮世尊釋迦如來應正等覺。
“Reverent salutation to World-Honored One Shakyamuni Tathagata, the Perfectly Awakened One.

我受教勅護持正法。
We received your command to protect the Right Dharma,

及與天人作諸饒益。
and to benefit gods and humans.

法藏已沒有緣已周今辭滅度。
Now the Dharma Treasury has perished, and conditions are exhausted, we bid farewell to enter nirvana.

說是語已一時俱入無餘涅槃。
Having said this, they simultaneously enter the remainderless nirvana.

先定願力火起焚身。如燈焰滅骸骨無遺。
The previous vow-power fire ignites, burning their bodies completely, leaving no remains.

時窣堵波便陷入地。
At that moment, the stupa sinks into the ground,

至金輪際方乃停住。
resting at the golden wheel base.

爾時世尊釋迦牟尼無上正法。
Then, the supreme Right Dharma of World-Honored One Shakyamuni Tathagata,

於此三千大千世界永滅不現。
in this entire three-thousand great-thousand world, will be forever extinguished and no longer appear.

從此無聞此佛土中有七萬俱胝獨覺一時出現。
From then on, seventy thousand koṭis of Pratyekabuddhas will simultaneously appear in this Buddha realm,

至人壽量八萬歲時。
until the life span reaches eighty thousand years.

獨覺聖眾復皆滅度。
Then, the Pratyekabuddha sangha will all enter nirvana.

次後彌勒如來應正等覺出現世間時贍部洲廣博嚴淨無諸荊棘谿谷堆埠。
Next, when Maitreya Tathagata appears in the world, Jambudvipa will be vast, pure, and free of thorns, ravines, and mounds.

平正潤澤金沙覆地。
The land will be even and moist, covered with golden sand.

處處皆有清池茂林名花瑞草及眾寶聚。
Everywhere will have clear pools, lush forests, famous flowers, auspicious grasses, and heaps of jewels.

更相輝映甚可愛樂。
All reflecting each other, extremely delightful.

人皆慈心修行十善。
People will all have kind hearts, practicing the ten virtues.

以修善故壽命長遠豐樂安隱。
Due to practicing virtue, their lives will be long, prosperous, and peaceful.

士女殷稠城邑隣次鷄飛相及。
Men and women will be numerous, cities and villages will be contiguous, chickens will fly from one roof to another.

所營農稼一種七穫。
Each planting of crops will yield seven harvests.

自然成實不須耘耨。
They will naturally ripen without the need for weeding.

諸仁者於彼時中。
Reverent ones, at that time,

國界莊嚴有情果報陳之難盡。
the adornment of the realm and the resulting karma of sentient beings will be difficult to fully describe.

具如彌勒成佛經說。
As fully described in the Maitreya Becoming Buddha Sutra,

彌勒如來成正覺已。
once Maitreya Tathagata attains complete enlightenment,

為聲聞眾三會說法令出生死得證涅槃。
he will hold three teaching assemblies for the śrāvakas to help them escape saṃsāra and attain nirvana.

第一會度九十六俱胝聲聞眾。
In the first assembly, he will liberate ninety-six koṭis of śrāvakas.

第二會度九十四俱胝聲聞眾。
In the second assembly, he will liberate ninety-four koṭis of śrāvakas.

第三會度九十二俱胝聲聞眾。
In the third assembly, he will liberate ninety-two koṭis of śrāvakas.

若諸國王大臣長者居士男女一切施主。
If all kings, ministers, elders, householders, men, and women,

於今釋迦牟尼佛正法中。
in the current Right Dharma of Shakyamuni Buddha,

能為佛事自種善根。
can perform meritorious deeds and plant wholesome roots,

或教他種謂以七寶金銀真珠璧玉香材鍮石銅鐵木石泥漆。
or teach others to plant them by using the seven treasures—gold, silver, pearls, jade, fragrant woods, brass, stone, copper, iron, wood, clay, and lacquer,

或以繒縷或以彩畫。
or with silk and thread or paintings,

作佛形像及窣堵波。
to create images of the Buddha and stupas,

若大若小乃至最小如指節量。
whether large or small, even as small as a finger joint.

或以香花諸妙供具。
or with incense, flowers, and various wondrous offerings,

若多若少而為供養。
whether in great quantity or small, as offerings.

彼由如是善根力故。
By the power of these wholesome roots,

至彌勒如來成正覺時善得人身。
they will attain human birth when Maitreya Tathagata attains perfect enlightenment.

於彼佛第一會中以淨信心捨俗出家剃除鬚髮披著法服既預聖眾。
In that Buddha's first assembly, with pure faith, they will renounce household life, shave their heads, don the Dharma robes, and join the holy assembly.

隨宿願力便得涅槃。
According to their past vows, they will attain nirvana.

是名第一為佛事故種善根者所得果報。
This is the first type of fruit of merit for those who plant wholesome roots by performing deeds for the Buddha.

若諸國王及以臣庶一切施主。
If all kings, ministers, and commoners, all donors,

於今釋迦牟尼佛正法中。
in the current Right Dharma of Shakyamuni Buddha,

能為法事自種善根。
can perform Dharma deeds and plant wholesome roots,

或教他種。
or teach others to plant them.

謂於大乘素呾纜藏。
Referring to the Mahayana Sutra Pitaka,

所有甚深空性相應諸大乘經。
all the profound Mahayana sutras associated with emptiness,

謂般若波羅蜜多經。
such as Prajnaparamita Sutra,

妙法芬陀利迦經。
the Lotus Sutra,

金光明經。
the Golden Light Sutra,

金剛手藏經。
the Vajradhatu Sutra,

首楞伽摩三摩地經。
the Shurangama Samadhi Sutra,

幻喻三摩地經。
the Illusory Samadhi Sutra,

大神變三摩地經。
the Great Supernatural Powers Samadhi Sutra,

集諸功德三摩地經。
the Compendium of Virtuous Samadhi Sutra,

還如來智印三摩地經。
the Tathagata's Seal of Wisdom Samadhi Sutra,

具諸威光三摩地經。
the Complete Radiance Samadhi Sutra,

寶臺經。
the Jewel Platform Sutra,

集諸菩薩三摩地經。
the Compendium of Bodhisattva Samadhi Sutra,

諸佛攝受經。
the Sutra of the Buddha's Embrace,

集請問經。
the Assemblies of Inquiry Sutra,

梵王問經。
the Brahma’s King Inquiry Sutra,

善吉問經。
the Inquiry of Sagacity Sutra,

勇猛問經。
the Inquiry of Courage Sutra,

能滿問經。
the Inquiry of Accomplishment Sutra,

海龍王問經。
the Ocean Dragon King Inquiry Sutra,

無熱惱龍王問經。
the Cool-Hearted Dragon King Inquiry Sutra,

樹幢龍王問經。
the Tree-Banner Dragon King Inquiry Sutra,

寶掌問經。
the Jewel Hand Inquiry Sutra,

寶髻問經。
the Jewel Topknot Inquiry Sutra,

虛空音問經。
the Space Sound Inquiry Sutra,

虛空吼問經。
the Sky Roar Inquiry Sutra,

幻網問經。
the Illusory Net Inquiry Sutra,

寶女問經。
the Jewel Maiden Inquiry Sutra,

妙女問經。
the Wondrous Maiden Inquiry Sutra,

善臂問經。
the Virtuous Arm Inquiry Sutra,

師子問經。
the Lion Inquiry Sutra,

猛授問經。
the Bold Grant Inquiry Sutra,

金光女問經。
the Golden Light Maiden Inquiry Sutra,

說無盡慧經。
the Endless Wisdom Sutra,

說無垢稱經。
the Immaculate Reputation Sutra,

未生怨王經。
the Unborn Foe King Sutra,

諦實經。
the Truth Sutra,

那羅延經。
the Naryana Sutra,

佛花嚴經。
the Flower Adornment Sutra,

蓮華手經。
the Lotus Hand Sutra,

十佛名經。
the Ten Buddha Names Sutra,

無量光眾經。
the Immeasurable Light Assembly Sutra,

極樂眾經。
the Ultimate Bliss Assembly Sutra,

集淨華經。
the Pure Flower Assembly Sutra,

大集經。
the Great Assembly Sutra,

入一切道經。
the Entry Into All Paths Sutra,

寶幢經。
the Jewel Banner Sutra,

寶聚經。
the Jewel Assembly Sutra,

寶篋經。
the Jewel Casket Sutra,

彩畫經。
the Painted Sutra,

高頂王經。
the High Peak King Sutra.

如是等大乘經。
Such Mahayana sutras,

有百俱胝部。
in hundreds of koṭis of sections,

黨差別復有大乘毘柰耶藏。
also include the Mahayana Vinaya Pitaka,

阿毘達磨藏眾多部類。
and various texts of the Abhidharma Pitaka.

一切皆是菩薩藏攝。
All are integral to the Bodhisattva Pitaka.

復有聲聞三藏。
Additionally, there are the Śrāvaka Tripiṭaka,

謂素怛纜藏。
referring to the Sutra Pitaka,

毘柰耶藏。
the Vinaya Pitaka,

阿毘達磨藏。
and the Abhidharma Pitaka.

素怛纜藏。
The Sutra Pitaka,

有五阿笈摩。
contains five Agamas,

謂長阿笈摩。
namely the Dīrgha Āgama,

中阿笈摩。
the Madhyama Āgama,

增一阿笈摩。
the Ekottarika Āgama,

相應阿笈摩。
the Saṃyukta Āgama,

雜類阿笈摩。
and the Khuddaka Āgama.

毘柰耶藏中有苾芻戒經苾芻尼戒經。
In the Vinaya Pitaka, there are the Bhikshu Vinaya Sutra, the Bhikshuni Vinaya Sutra,

分別戒本諸蘊差別及增一律。
the Separate Precepts Source, the Discernment of Aggregates, and the Increased Precepts.

阿毘達磨藏中。
In the Abhidharma Pitaka,

有攝六問相應發趣等。
are the Compendium of Six Queries, the Correspondences, the Ascension, etc.

眾多部類。
There are various texts.

復有本生鬘讚獨覺鬘讚。
Additionally, there are Praise of Jataka Garland and Praise of Pratyekabuddha Garland.

於如是等正法藏中。
In such Treasuries of Right Dharma,

或是佛說或菩薩說或聲聞說或諸仙說。
whether spoken by the Buddha, Bodhisattvas, Arhats, or seers,

或諸天說或智者說。
or spoken by gods or wise ones,

能引義利乃至有能。
they lead to meanings and benefits, even to the four-line verses,

於四句頌。
whether self-recited or taught to others to recite,

若自誦若教他誦。
whether self-read or taught to others to read,

若自讀若教他讀。
whether self-held or taught to others to hold,

若自持若教他持。
whether self-explained or taught to others to explain,

若自解說若教他解說。
whether respected and offered to Dharma teachers,

或於法師恭敬供養。
or respected and offered to the sutras,

或於經卷恭敬供養。
using various incense, flowers, banners, canopies, music, and lights as offerings,

謂以種種香花幡蓋伎樂燈明而為供養。
or decorating the sutra volumes with various kinds of pouches, cloths, threads, and stripes.

或於經卷以諸雜綵囊帊縷帶而嚴飾之。
By these wholesome roots,

由如是等善根力故。
when Maitreya Tathagata attains perfect enlightenment,

至彌勒如來成正覺時善現人身。
they will attain human birth,

於彼佛第二會中以淨信心捨離家法出趣非家。
and in the second assembly of that Buddha, with pure faith, they will renounce household life and enter the noble path,

淨除鬚髮披著法服既預聖眾。
shaving their heads, donning the Dharma robes, and joining the holy assembly.

隨宿願力便得涅槃。
According to their past vows, they will attain nirvana.

是名第二為法事故種善根者所得果報。
This is the second type of fruit of merit for those who plant wholesome roots by performing deeds for the Dharma.



若諸國王及臣庶等。一切施主於今釋迦牟尼佛正法中。能為僧事自種善根。或教他種。謂諸苾芻苾芻尼眾。或次第請或隨緣請。於月一日或月八日或十五日設齋供養。或往寺中若供養佛。若供養眾或作給侍。或有供養修靜慮者。或有供養諸說法者。或見有人欲於正法學習流布。從師聽受不作留難。施其所安無令怯退。或設五年無遮施會。或施四方僧。或施寺舍及坐臥具。或施鍾磬或施園林。如是等類供養僧眾。彼由如是善根力故。至彌勒如來成正覺時善得人身。於彼佛第三會中。以淨信心捨離家法出趣非家。淨除鬚髮披著法服既預聖眾。隨宿願力便得涅槃。是名第三為僧事故種善根者所得果報。



若諸國王及臣庶等。
If all kings, ministers, and commoners,

一切施主於今釋迦牟尼佛正法中。
all donors, in the current Right Dharma of Shakyamuni Buddha,

能為僧事自種善根。
can perform meritorious deeds for the sangha and plant wholesome roots,

或教他種。
or teach others to plant them.

謂諸苾芻苾芻尼眾。
For the bhikshus and bhikshunis,

或次第請或隨緣請。
either inviting them in order or according to circumstances,

於月一日或月八日或十五日設齋供養。
holding offerings on the first, eighth, or fifteenth day of the month,

或往寺中若供養佛。
or going to temples to offer to the Buddha,

若供養眾或作給侍。
offering to the sangha, or serving them,

或有供養修靜慮者。
or offering to those practicing meditation,

或有供養諸說法者。
or offering to those teaching the Dharma,

或見有人欲於正法學習流布。
or seeing those wishing to study and spread the Right Dharma,

從師聽受不作留難。
learning from teachers without obstruction,

施其所安無令怯退。
providing for them so they do not retreat from anxiety.

或設五年無遮施會。
Or organizing five-year unimpeded offerings,

或施四方僧。
or offering to monks from all quarters,

或施寺舍及坐臥具。
or providing temples, seats, and beds,

或施鍾磬或施園林。
or donating bells, gongs, or gardens.

如是等類供養僧眾。
Such types of offerings to the sangha,

彼由如是善根力故。
by the power of these wholesome roots,

至彌勒如來成正覺時善得人身。
they will attain human birth when Maitreya Tathagata attains perfect enlightenment.

於彼佛第三會中。
In that Buddha's third assembly,

以淨信心捨離家法出趣非家。
with pure faith, they will renounce household life and enter homelessness,

淨除鬚髮披著法服既預聖眾。
shaving their heads, donning the Dharma robes, and joining the holy assembly.

隨宿願力便得涅槃。
According to their past vows, they will attain nirvana.

是名第三為僧事故種善根者所得果報。
This is the third type of fruit of merit for those who plant wholesome roots by performing deeds for the sangha.



爾時慶友大阿羅漢。為諸大眾廣說如上事已。以神通力於大眾前身昇虛空。高七多羅樹。示現種種不可思議雙神變事。令所觀眾增進勝道。時彼尊者現神變已。即於空中結跏趺坐。捨諸壽行及諸命行。入無餘依般涅槃界。先定願力火起焚身。於虛空中雨身遺骨。時諸大眾悲歎希有。競收遺骨起窣堵波。以諸香花寶幢幡蓋伎樂燈明常為供養。此法住記古昔諸師展轉相承誦持不忘。為令一切國王大臣長者居士諸施主等。了達因果厭生老病死芭蕉幻焰泡沫之身。修諸勝業於當來世逢事彌勒。解脫煩惱得大涅槃生愛樂故。於佛正法護持建立令久不滅。



爾時慶友大阿羅漢。
At that time, the Great Arhat Nandimitra,

為諸大眾廣說如上事已。
after broadly explaining the above matters to the assembly,

以神通力於大眾前身昇虛空。
used his supernatural power to ascend into the sky before the assembly,

高七多羅樹。
rising to the height of seven tala trees.

示現種種不可思議雙神變事。
He manifested various inconceivable twin miraculous displays,

令所觀眾增進勝道。
to enhance the path of those observing.

時彼尊者現神變已。
Having exhibited these miracles,

即於空中結跏趺坐。
he sat cross-legged in the sky,

捨諸壽行及諸命行。
abandoning all bodily and vital activities.

入無餘依般涅槃界。
He entered the sphere of parinirvana without remainder.

先定願力火起焚身。
The preordained vow-power fire arose, consuming his body,

於虛空中雨身遺骨。
and in the sky, his relics fell like rain.

時諸大眾悲歎希有。
The assembly lamented this rare occurrence,

競收遺骨起窣堵波。
eagerly collecting the relics to erect stupas.

以諸香花寶幢幡蓋伎樂燈明常為供養。
They always offered incense, flowers, precious banners, canopies, music, and lamps.

此法住記古昔諸師展轉相承誦持不忘。
This Record of the Teachings Abiding in the Dharma has been passed down by ancient masters, never forgotten,

為令一切國王大臣長者居士諸施主等。
to enable all kings, ministers, elders, householders, and donors,

了達因果厭生老病死芭蕉幻焰泡沫之身。
to understand cause and effect, weary of birth, aging, sickness, and death, seeing the body as plantain, illusion, flame, and foam.

修諸勝業於當來世逢事彌勒。
Cultivate virtuous deeds to encounter Maitreya in the future,

解脫煩惱得大涅槃生愛樂故。
and be liberated from afflictions, attaining great nirvana, born of joy and love.

於佛正法護持建立令久不滅。
To protect, establish, and ensure the Buddha's Right Dharma endures long without perishing.



大阿羅漢難提蜜多羅所說法住記
Record of the Teachings Abiding in the Dharma as Spoken by the Great Arhat Nandimitra
