#----------------------------------------------------------------------
#【經文資訊】大正新脩大藏經 第 11 冊 No. 313 阿閦佛國經
"Akṣobhya-vyūha Sūtra" (The Scripture of the Akṣobhya Buddha's Pure Land)
#【版本記錄】發行日期：2023-12，最後更新：2022-10-15
#【編輯說明】本資料庫由 財團法人佛教電子佛典基金會（CBETA）依「大正新脩大藏經」所編輯
#【原始資料】蕭鎮國大德提供，維習安大德提供之高麗藏 CD 經文，北美某大德提供，毛佩君、廖予安、廖予慈大德提供新式標點
#【其他事項】本資料庫可自由免費流通，詳細內容請參閱【財團法人佛教電子佛典基金會資料庫版權宣告】
#----------------------------------------------------------------------

No. 313 [No. 310(6)]
阿閦佛國經卷上

後漢月支國三藏支婁迦讖譯
Eastern Han Dynasty, in the Yuezhi country, Tripitaka translator Lokakṣema translated.

發意受慧品第一
Generating the Intention to Receive Wisdom, Chapter One.

聞如是：
Thus have I heard:

一時佛在羅閱祇耆闍崛山中，與大比丘眾比丘千二百五十人俱，皆阿羅漢也——生死已斷，無復有結，悉壞牢獄，已得自在意、已善解智慧，為度諸天、龍王皆為之伏，所作已辦，諸當為者已脫重擔，便得所有，用正慧解，意得自在，所度無極——獨阿難未也。
At one time the Buddha was in Mount Gijjhakuta in Rajagaha, together with a great assembly of twelve hundred and fifty bhikṣus, all of whom were Arhats—having severed the cycle of birth and death, no longer bound, fully liberated from the prison (of Samsara), having attained freedom of mind and profound wisdom, they subdued deities and dragon kings for the sake of crossing over, having completed what needed to be done, had shed their heavy burden, then attained all, with right wisdom resolved, their minds were at ease), their liberation was boundless, except Ananda had not yet (achieved this).

爾時，賢者舍利弗起，長跪叉手而白佛言：「善哉，天中天！昔者諸菩薩求無上正真道者行德號發意便得至號。是諸菩薩以儀哀念安隱諸天及世間人，為作安諦、多所安隱，於眾人民以儀故哀念安定，以大身於世間無蓋哀傷諸天及人。今現在及過去諸菩薩摩訶薩為現光明乃至法之明為作照明，令至佛光明而無有名。若有求菩薩道者，當如昔者諸菩薩摩訶薩所願及行明照并僧那令入德號，以聞者當如是學奉行之。學如是者，即為成阿惟越致及無上正真道也。」
At that time, the wise Śāriputra stood up, knelt with hands folded in veneration, and addressed the Buddha, saying, ""Excellent, World-Honored One! In the past, all Bodhisattvas who sought the supreme and authentic way, upon generating their intention, rapidly attained virtue. These Bodhisattvas, through rituals and compassionate mindfulness, brought peace and security to deities and humans in the world, established truths of peace, extensively bringing peace and security to the masses, for the sake of ceremonies, they compassionately calmed the masses, and with their bodies in the world, unconditionally comforted the sorrowful among deities and humans. Now, presently as well as past all Bodhisattvas-Mahasattvas manifest light, even the brightness of Dharma serves as illumination to reach Buddha's light without being named. If there are those seeking the Bodhisattva path, they should, like those Bodhisattvas-Mahasattvas of the past, whose wishes and actions brightly illuminate  together with the Sangha allow entry into the rank of virtue. Those who hear of this should learn and practice accordingly. Learning in such a way immediately achieves sublime goals and the supreme authentic path."

佛言：「善哉，賢者舍利弗！所問甚善。汝乃問過去諸菩薩摩訶薩所願及行照明并僧那令至所號，念諸當來菩薩令受取之。諦聽是，舍利弗！善思念之，為汝解說過去諸菩薩摩訶薩所施行。」
The Buddha said, :"Excellent, wise Śāriputra! This question you asked is very good. You indeed ask about the wishes and actions that illuminate the past Bodhisattvas-Mahasattvas, together with the Sangha, lead to virtue, remember the future Bodhisattvas to let them receive it. Listen carefully to this, Śāriputra! Think well on this, for I will explain to you what the past Bodhisattvas-Mahasattvas have implemented."

舍利弗言：「唯然，世尊！願樂欲聞。」
Śāriputra said, "Indeed, World-Honored One! I am eager and pleased to hear."

佛告舍利弗：「有世界名阿比羅提，其佛名大目，於彼為諸菩薩摩訶薩說法及六度無極之行。」
The Buddha told Śāriputra, "There is a world named Abhirati, its Buddha named Mahāvyūha, in it, for all Bodhisattvas-Mahasattvas, (Mahāvyūha) expounds the Dharma and the six pāramitās (perfections) action without limits."

爾時，賢者舍利弗心念言：「我欲問如來、天中天：何所是阿比羅提世界及大目如來、無所著、等正覺為諸菩薩摩訶薩說法及六度無極之行者乎？」
At that time, the wise Śāriputra inwardly thought, "I wish to ask the Tathagata, the most honored one in the heavens: What is the world of Abhirati and the Tathagata Mahāvyūha, without attachment, Perfectly Enlightened One, who expounds the Dharma and the actions of the six perfections without limits to all Bodhisattvas-Mahasattvas?"

時佛即知賢者舍利弗心所念，告舍利弗言：「東方去是千佛剎，有世界名阿比羅提，其佛名大目如來、無所著、等正覺，為諸菩薩說法及六度無極之行者乎。
Then the Buddha immediately knew what the wise Śāriputra was thinking in his heart and told Śāriputra, saying, "To the east, there are a thousand buddha-lands, there is a world named Abhirati, its Buddha is named Mahāvyūha Tathāgata, without attachment, the Perfectly Enlightened One, who expounds the Dharma to all Bodhisattvas and practices the limitless actions of the six perfections."

「時有比丘從坐起，正衣服，右膝著地，向大目如來叉手，白大目如來言：『唯，天中天！我欲如菩薩結願，學所當學者。』
"At that time, a bhikkhu rose from his seat, adjusted his robe, placed his right knee on the ground, and with palms joined together towards Mahāvyūha Tathāgata, addressed Mahāvyūha Tathāgata, saying, 'Yes, World-Honored One! I wish to make a vow like a Bodhisattva and to learn what should be learned."

「如是，舍利弗！其大目如來告其比丘言：『如結願學諸菩薩道者甚亦難。所以者何？菩薩於一切人民及蜎飛、蠕動之類不得有瞋恚。』
"Thus, Śāriputra! Mahāvyūha Tathāgata said to the bhikkhu, 'To make a vow and learn the Bodhisattva path is indeed very difficult. Why is that? A Bodhisattva must not harbor anger or aversion towards all beings, including those that fly and crawl.'"

「如是，舍利弗！其比丘白大目如來言：『天中天！我從今以往發無上正真道意，以意勸助而不離之，用願無上正真道也，當令無諛諂，所語至誠、所言無異。
"Thus, Śāriputra! The bhikkhu said to Mahāvyūha Tathāgata, 'World-Honored One! From now on, I will cultivate the intention towards the supreme authentic path, with this intention to encourage and support without departing from it, through the aspiration for the supreme authentic path. I must be without flattery, my speech sincere, and my words without deceit.'"

「『唯，天中天！我發是薩芸若意，審如是願為無上正真道者，若於一切人民、蜎飛、蠕動之類起是瞋恚，第一意若發弟子緣一覺意、第二唯意念婬欲、第三若發意念睡眠念眾想由譽、第四發意念狐疑、第五乃至成最正覺，我為欺是諸佛、世尊——諸不可計無央數、不可思議無量世界中諸佛、天中天今現在說法者。
"Indeed, World-Honored One! I generate Bodhicitta, earnestly aspiring for the supreme authentic path. If towards all people, and flying or crawling creatures, I give rise to anger [or the following:] firstly, should a thought arise in a disciple for awakening alone, secondly, to solely entertain sensual desires, thirdly, to think of indulging in sleep or distractions for praise, fourthly, to entertain doubts, and fifthly, even up to achieving supreme and perfect enlightenment, I would be deceiving not only these countless Buddhas, the World-Honored Ones in innumerable worlds but also, the World-Honored One, who presently expounds the Dharma.'

「『唯，天中天！我發是薩芸若意，審如是願為無上正真道者，若我發意念殺生者，第一若發意念盜取他人財物、第二若發意念非梵行者、第三若發意念妄言、第四若發意念悔恨、第五乃至成最正覺，我為欺是諸佛、世尊——諸不可計無央數、不可思議無量世界中諸佛、天中天今現在說法者。
Indeed, World-Honored One ! I generate the bodhicitta, earnestly aspiring for the supreme, authentic path. "If I should conceive the intention to kill living beings: Firstly, if I entertain the thought of stealing the property of others, Secondly, if I harbor the intention not to conduct myself in purity, Thirdly, if I entertain the thought of speaking falsely, Fourthly, if I conceive the thought of harboring resentment, Fifthly, until achieving supreme enlightenment, I would be deceiving these Buddhas, the World-Honored Ones — innumerable, inconceivable Buddhas across countless worlds, the Lords of Heavens, who are now expounding the Dharma.

「『唯，天中天！我發是薩芸若意，審如是願為無上正真道者，若我發意念罵詈，第一若發意念惡口、第二愚癡、第三若發意念綺語、第四若發意念邪見、第五乃至成最正覺，我為欺是諸佛、世尊——諸不可計無央數、不可思議無量世界中諸佛、天中天今現在說法者。』」
"Indeed, World-Honored One! I, who earnestly aspire for the supreme authentic path, vow that should I conceive the thoughts of abusive speech, firstly of harsh speech, secondly of ignorance, thirdly of frivolous talk, fourthly of wrong views, and fifthly, up to the attainment of supreme perfect enlightenment, I would be deceiving these Buddhas, the World-Honored Ones, the Buddhas of countless, inconceivable, innumerable worlds, who are the World-Honored Ones presently expounding the Dharma.

佛語舍利弗：「其比丘如是為，以被是大僧那僧涅——菩薩摩訶薩初發是意，乃於一切人民、蜎飛、蠕動之類意無瞋怒、亦無恚恨也。
Buddha said to Śāriputra: "When this bhikṣu thus is embraced by the great Saṅgha, the Saṅgha's nirvāṇa, the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva, upon first arousing this intention, then towards all humans, flying beings, and crawling creatures, has a mind without anger, also without malice."

「舍利弗！爾時，其菩薩摩訶薩用無瞋恚故名之為阿閦，用無瞋恚故住阿閦地。其大目如來、無所著、等正覺亦歡樂作是名、四天王亦歡樂為是名、天帝釋及梵三鉢亦歡樂作是名。」
Śāriputra! At that time, because the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva was without anger or hatred, he was named Akṣobhya, and because of being without anger or hatred, he dwelt in the land of Akṣobhya. The Tathāgata Mahāvyūha, Unattached, perfectly enlightened, also delighted in this name, as did the Four Heavenly Kings, the god Indra, and Brahmā Sahampati.

佛語舍利弗：「其阿閦菩薩摩訶薩白大目如來、無所著、等正覺言：『唯，天中天！我發是薩芸若意，審如是不離願、為無上正真道者，不奉行如今所語、常不捨得律行迹、不發薩芸若意而欲念成佛者，世世不常作沙門、世世不常著補納之衣、世世作沙門以三法衣不具，乃至成最正覺，我為欺是諸佛、世尊——諸不可計無央數、不可思議無量世界中諸佛、天中天今現在說法者。
The Buddha said to Śāriputra, 'That Akṣobhya Bodhisattva Mahāsattva said to Mahāvyūha Tathāgata, Unattached, Perfectly Enlightened One, "Indeed, Supreme Deity of the Devas! I generate bodhicitta, earnestly unwavering from the vow, for the supreme authentic path. Not practicing as presently spoken, always not abandoning the practice of discipline, not generating bodhicitta yet wishing to become a Buddha, in every life, not always becoming a Śramaṇa, in every life, not always wearing the patched robes, being a monk in every life but without the complete three robes, until achieving supreme and perfect enlightenment, I would be deceiving these countless Buddhas, the World-Honored One, beyond calculation, countless, innumerable throughout worlds, the heavenly supreme deities who now are expounding the Dharma.'

「『唯，天中天！我發薩芸若意，審如是願為無上正真道者，世世不常為人說法、世世不常作法師、世世所說事不有無所罣礙高明之行、世世不有無量高明之智、世世作沙門不常行分衛，乃至成最正覺，我為欺是諸佛、世尊——諸不可計無央數、不可思議無量世界中諸佛、天中天今現在說法者。
"Indeed, Supreme Deity of the Devas! I, earnestly aspiring for the supreme authentic path, vow that should I conceive the intention to kill, firstly to steal, secondly to engage in sexual misconduct, thirdly to speak falsely, fourthly to hold malice, and fifthly, even until achieving perfect enlightenment, I would be deceiving these Buddhas, the World-Honored Ones—uncountable, inconceivable across innumerable worlds, the supreme deities who are now expounding the Dharma."


「『唯，天中天！我發是薩芸若意，審如是願為無上正真道者，世世作沙門已不常在樹下坐、世世不常精進行三事。何等三？一者、經行，二者、坐，三者、住。世世若發意念罪本、妄語欺人、誹謗讒言、世世為女人說法及食飲因緣、若起想著笑為說法者，乃至成最正覺，我為欺是諸佛、世尊——諸不可計無央數、不可思議無量世界中諸佛、天中天今現在說法者。
"Indeed, Supreme Deity of the Devas! I, who earnestly aspire for the supreme authentic path, vow that if I conceive the thoughts of abusive speech, firstly of harsh speech, secondly of ignorance, thirdly of frivolous talk, fourthly of wrong views, and fifthly, up until the attainment of supreme perfect enlightenment, I would be deceiving not only these countless Buddhas, the World-Honored Ones, but also the inconceivable Buddhas across innumerable worlds, the supreme deities who are presently expounding the Dharma."

「『唯，天中天！我發是薩芸若意，審如是願為無上正真道者，世世若舉手說法、世世見餘菩薩不發佛心、世世若發意念供養外異道人、捨諸如來、世世若在坐上聽法，乃至成最正覺，我為欺是諸佛、世尊——諸不可計無央數、不可思議無量世界中諸佛、天中天今現在說法者。
"Indeed, Supreme Deity of the Devas! I, earnestly aspiring for the supreme authentic path, vow that if in every life I should raise my hand to preach the Dharma, in every life see other Bodhisattvas and not arouse the Buddha-mind, in every life conceive the thought of making offerings to practitioners of other paths, forsaking all Tathāgatas, and in every life sit to listen to the Dharma until achieving the highest, perfect enlightenment, I would be deceiving all these Buddhas, the World-Honored Ones—innumerable, inconceivable across boundless worlds, the supreme deities now expounding the Dharma."


「『唯，天中天！我發是薩芸若意，審如是願為無上正真道者，世世若發意念：「我當布施與某、不布施與某。」世世若發意念：「我當於某處立福施、於某處不立福施。」世世若發意念：「我常持法施與某、不持法施與某。」世世見孤窮用其人故不分身命，乃至成最正覺，我為欺是諸佛、世尊——諸不可計無央數、不可思議無量世界中諸佛、天中天今現在說法者。
"Indeed, Supreme Deity of the Devas! I, who earnestly aspire for the supreme authentic path, vow that if in every life I entertain the thought: 'I shall give charity to some and not to others.' In every life, I conceive the thought: 'I shall establish meritorious deeds here but not there.' In every life, I resolve: 'I will consistently offer the Dharma to some but not to others.' And in every life, upon seeing the destitute, I do not give of myself for their sake, even up to achieving supreme enlightenment, I would be deceiving all these Buddhas, the World-Honored Ones—countless, inconceivable across boundless worlds, the supreme deities who are expounding the Dharma right now."

「『唯，天中天！我發是薩芸若意，審如是願為無上正真道者，我世世於諸菩薩所意無有異，至無上正真最正覺也。』」
"Indeed, Lord of the Heavens! By generating Bodhicitta intent, earnestly with such a vow for the supreme authentic path, In every life, my mind differs not from that of all Bodhisattvas until achieving anuttarā-samyak-saṃbodhi."


佛語舍利弗：「爾時，其比丘如是，如來、無所著、等正覺為作保任。若如來為作保任者，諸天、阿須倫、世間人民亦為作保任。爾時，大目如來為作保任，時諸天、阿須倫、世間人民亦為作保任。」
The Buddha said to Śāriputra: 'At that time, the bhikṣu thus, and the Tathāgata, Unattached, Perfectly Enlightened, thus made a commitment. If the Tathāgata makes such a commitment, then gods, asuras, and the people of the world also make this commitment. At that time, Mahāvyūha Tathāgata made this commitment, and the deities, asuras, and people of the world likewise make this commitment.'

佛言：「若復有比丘菩薩摩訶薩以是色像僧那求無上正真道者，皆當成無上正真道最正覺也。」
"The Buddha said, 'If there are again bhikṣu Bodhisattvas-Mahasattvas, with such qualities within this Saṅgha, seeking the supreme authentic path, they will all achieve the supreme authentic path, anuttarā-samyak-saṃbodhi.

佛語舍利弗：「其阿閦菩薩白大目如來、無所著等正覺：『唯，天中天！我發是薩芸若意，審如是願為無上正真道者，令我成最正覺時，其剎所有比丘、比丘尼、優婆塞、優婆夷若有罪惡者及讒罪惡者，我為欺是諸佛、世尊——諸不可計無央數、不可思議無量世界中諸佛、天中天今現在說法者。
The Buddha said to Śāriputra: 'Akṣobhya Bodhisattva addressed Mahāvyūha Tathāgata, Unattached, Perfectly Enlightened, "Indeed, World-Honored One! I generate this Bodhicitta intent, earnestly with such a vow for the supreme authentic path. When I achieve anuttarā-samyak-saṃbodhi, if among the monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen in his saṅgha, there are those who commit evil or slander, I would be deceiving these Buddhas, the World-Honored Ones—the countless, inconceivable Buddhas across innumerable worlds, the World-Honored Ones who are currently expounding the Dharma.

「『復次，天中天！我當修行乃至成無上正真道最正覺，令我佛剎諸弟子一切皆無有罪惡者，我當修佛道至令佛剎嚴淨。
"Furthermore, World-Honored One! I shall practice until I achieve anuttarā-samyak-saṃbodhi, making all disciples in my Buddha-field free of wrongful deeds. I shall cultivate the Buddha-Dharma to make the Buddha-field solemn and pure."

「『唯，天中天！我發是薩芸若意，審如是願為無上正真道者，我若於夢中失精，乃至成最正覺，我為欺是諸佛、世尊——諸不可計無央數、不可思議無量世界中諸佛、天中天今現在說法者。
Indeed, World-Honored One! I generate this Bodhicitta intent, earnestly with such a vow for the supreme authentic path. If I, in a dream, experience nocturnal emission, until achieving anuttarā-samyak-saṃbodhi, I would be deceiving these Buddhas, the World-Honored Ones—the countless, inconceivable Buddhas across innumerable worlds, the World-Honored Ones who are now expounding the Dharma.

「『復次，天中天！我當修行乃至成無上正真道最正覺，令我佛剎中諸菩薩出家為道者於夢中不失精。
Furthermore, World-Honored One! I shall practice until I achieve anuttarā-samyak-saṃbodhi, ensuring Bodhisattvas in my Buddha-field who renounce worldly life for the path do not experience nocturnal emission in dreams.


「『唯，天中天！我發是薩芸若意，審如是願為無上正真道者，世間母人有諸惡露，我成最正覺時我佛剎中母人有諸惡露者，我為欺是諸佛、世尊——諸不可計無央數、不可思議無量世界中諸佛、天中天今現在說法者。』
"Indeed, World-Honored One! I generate this Bodhicitta intent, earnestly with such a vow for the supreme authentic path. If, at the time I achieve anuttarā-samyak-saṃbodhi, the women in my Buddha-field experience certain natural but unwholesome conditions, I would be deceiving these Buddhas, the World-Honored Ones—the countless, inconceivable Buddhas across innumerable worlds, the World-Honored Ones who are currently expounding the Dharma.

「是為菩薩法事如意所念行，佛亦為如應說法。」
"This signifies the Bodhisattva's Dharma activities undertaken as wished, and the Buddha also properly expounds the Dharma accordingly."

佛語舍利弗：「爾時，有一比丘謂阿閦菩薩摩訶薩乃作是結願：『若使不退轉者，當以右指案地令大震動。』
"The Buddha said to Śāriputra, 'At that time, there was a bhikkhu who addressed Akṣobhya Bodhisattva Mahāsattva and made the following vow: "Should I bring about what cannot be reversed, I shall point to the ground with my right finger and cause it to greatly tremble."'

「爾時，阿閦菩薩應時承佛威神、自蒙高明力乃令地六反震動。阿閦菩薩摩訶薩所感動，如語無有異也。」
At that time, Akṣobhya Bodhisattva, at that moment, embraced by the Buddha's majestic power and endowed with brilliant strength, made the earth tremble six times. The movement caused by Akṣobhya Bodhisattva Mahāsattva was exactly as spoken, without any deviation.

佛語舍利弗：「若有菩薩欲成無上正真道最正覺者，當學阿閦菩薩摩訶薩行。菩薩摩訶薩以學阿閦菩薩行者，不久亦當即取佛剎土，當復成無上正真道最正覺也。」
The Buddha said to Śāriputra: 'If there is a Bodhisattva who aspires to attain anuttarā-samyak-saṃbodhi, they should follow the conduct of Akṣobhya Bodhisattva Mahāsattva. Those Bodhisattvas-Mahāsattvas who learn from the conduct of Akṣobhya Bodhisattva Mahāsattva will soon gain a buddha-field and will also attain anuttarā-samyak-saṃbodhi.'

爾時，賢者舍利弗問佛言：「天中天！阿閦菩薩摩訶薩初發意時，有幾何天在會中？」
At that time, the wise Śāriputra asked the Buddha, 'World-Honored One! When Akṣobhya Bodhisattva Mahāsattva first aroused his intention, how many deities were present in the assembly?'

佛告舍利弗：「阿閦菩薩初發意學時，三千大千世界中四天王天、帝釋及憋魔、梵三鉢一切皆向阿閦菩薩叉手說是語：『昔所不聞是僧那。』
The Buddha said to Śāriputra, 'When Akṣobhya Bodhisattva Mahāsattva first formed the intention to pursue [his path], within the trisāhasra-mahāsāhasra-lokadhātu, the Four Heavenly Kings, Indra, Mara, and Brahma Sahampati all addressed Akṣobhya Bodhisattva Mahāsattva with joined palms, saying, "Such a Saṅgha has never been heard of before."'

「諸天聞以便說言：『阿閦菩薩成無上正真道，若有人生其佛剎者，是人福德不小也。』」
The deities, upon hearing this, thereupon spoke, 'When Akṣobhya Bodhisattva achieves anuttarā-samyak-saṃbodhi, if there are people born in his Buddha-field, such people's merit is not small.'

賢者舍利弗白佛言：「未曾聞餘菩薩摩訶薩以是色像學僧那，我亦不見亦不聞如阿閦菩薩摩訶薩及天中天為作如是之名。」
The wise Śāriputra addressed the Buddha, saying, 'Never have I heard of other Bodhisattvas-Mahasattvas using such an image to learn from the Sangha, nor have I seen or heard of Bodhisattva-Mahasattva Akṣobhya and the World-Honored One being given such a name.'

佛言：「如是也。舍利弗！少有菩薩摩訶薩以是色像學僧那及無上正真道如阿閦菩薩摩訶薩。於是，舍利弗！陂陀劫中，諸菩薩摩訶薩其德不及阿閦菩薩摩訶薩之功德也。」
The Buddha said, 'It is as you say, Śāriputra. Few Bodhisattvas-Mahasattvas use such an image to learn from the Sangha and the supreme authentic path like Bodhisattva-Mahasattva Akṣobhya. Thus, Śāriputra, in the Bhadra-kalpa, the virtues of all the Bodhisattvas-Mahasattvas do not match the merits of Bodhisattva-Mahasattva Akṣobhya.'

佛語舍利弗：「爾時，其大目如來、無所著、等正覺授阿閦菩薩無上正真道決：『汝為當來佛，號阿閦如來、無所著、等正覺，成慧之行而為師父，安定世間無上大人，為法之御，天上天下尊，佛、天中天。亦如提洹竭佛授我決。』」
The Buddha said to Śāriputra, 'At that time, Mahavyūha Tathāgata, Unattached, Perfectly Enlightened, conferred upon Akṣobhya Bodhisattva the prediction of the supreme authentic path: "You shall be a future Buddha, named Akṣobhya Tathāgata, Unattached, Perfectly Enlightened, Master of the path of wisdom, the supreme great person who stabilizes the world, the sovereign of the Dharma, revered in heavens above and on earth below, a Buddha, the World-Honored One. Just as Tishya Buddha made the prediction for me."'

時佛語舍利弗：「大目如來授阿閦菩薩摩訶薩無上正真道決時，其三千大千世界皆為大明；譬我亦如是，授無上正真道決時，其三千大千世界皆為大明。
At that time, the Buddha said to Śāriputra, 'When Mahavyūha Tathāgata granted the prediction of the supreme authentic path to Akṣobhya Bodhisattva Mahāsattva, the trisāhasra-mahāsāhasra-lokadhātu all became greatly illuminated; similarly, it is also the case with me, when granting the prediction of the supreme authentic path, the trisāhasra-mahāsāhasra-lokadhātu all become greatly illuminated.'

「復次，舍利弗！其阿閦菩薩摩訶薩成無上正真道最正覺、得薩芸若慧時，其三千大千世界六反震動；譬我亦如是，成無上正真道、得薩芸慧時，三千大千世界為六反震動。
Furthermore, Śāriputra! When Akṣobhya Bodhisattva Mahāsattva attains the supreme and perfectly authentic enlightenment and acquires prajñā, the trisāhasra-mahāsāhasra-lokadhātu shakes in six ways; similarly, it is the same with me, when attaining the supreme authentic path and acquiring prajñā, the trisāhasra-mahāsāhasra-lokadhātu shakes in six ways.

「復次，舍利弗！阿閦菩薩摩訶薩授無上正真道決時，是三千大千世界中諸藥、樹木一切皆自曲低向阿閦菩薩作禮；譬我亦如是，成無上正真道最正覺、得薩芸若慧時，是三千大千世界諸藥、樹木一切皆自曲低向我作禮。
Furthermore, Śāriputra! When Akṣobhya Bodhisattva Mahāsattva was granted the prediction of the supreme authentic path, all the medicinal herbs and trees in the trisāhasra-mahāsāhasra-lokadhātu naturally bowed down in homage to Akṣobhya Bodhisattva. Similarly, it is with me, when I attained the supreme and perfectly authentic enlightenment and acquired prajñā, all the medicinal herbs and trees in the trisāhasra-mahāsāhasra-lokadhātu naturally bowed down in homage to me.

「復次，舍利弗！其大目如來、無所著、等正覺授阿閦菩薩摩訶薩無上正真道決時，其三千大千世界中諸天、龍、鬼神、揵沓惒、阿須倫、迦留羅、真陀羅、摩休勒一切皆向阿閦菩薩叉手而作禮；譬我亦如是，成無上正真道最正覺、得薩芸若慧時，三千大千世界諸天、龍、鬼神、揵陀羅、阿須倫、迦留羅、真陀羅、摩睺勒皆向我叉手作禮。
"Furthermore, Śāriputra! When Mahavyūha Tathāgata, Unattached, Perfectly Enlightened, granted the prediction of anuttarā-samyak-saṃbodhi to Akṣobhya Bodhisattva Mahāsattva, all gods, dragons, spirits, Gandharvas, Asuras, Garudas, Kinnaras, and Mahoragas in the trisāhasra-mahāsāhasra-lokadhātu joined their hands in homage to Akṣobhya Bodhisattva. Similarly, it is with me, when I achieved anuttarā-samyak-saṃbodhi and acquired prajñā, all gods, dragons, spirits, Gandharvas, Asuras, Garudas, Kinnaras, and Mahoragas in the trisāhasra-mahāsāhasra-lokadhātu joined their hands in homage to me.

「復次，舍利弗！其大目如來、無所著、等正覺授阿閦菩薩摩訶薩無上正真道決時，遍三千大千世界諸妊身女人皆安隱產、盲者得視、聾者得聽；譬我亦如是，成無上正真道最正覺、得薩芸若慧時，是三千大千世界諸妊身女人皆安隱產、盲者得視、聾者得聽。
Furthermore, Śāriputra! When Mahavyūha Tathāgata, Unattached, Perfectly Enlightened, granted the prediction of anuttarā-samyak-saṃbodhi to Akṣobhya Bodhisattva Mahāsattva, throughout the trisāhasra-mahāsāhasra-lokadhātu all pregnant women gave birth safely, the blind regained their sight, and the deaf regained their hearing; similarly, it is with me, when I attained anuttarā-samyak-saṃbodhi and acquired prajñā, throughout the trisāhasra-mahāsāhasra-lokadhātu all pregnant women gave birth safely, the blind regained their sight, and the deaf regained their hearing.

「復次，舍利弗！大目如來、無所著、等正覺授阿閦菩薩摩訶薩無上正真道決時，遍三千大千世界中人非人皆燒香；譬我亦如是，成無上正真道最正覺、得薩芸若慧時，遍三千大千世界中人非人皆燒香。」
Furthermore, Śāriputra! When Mahavyūha Tathāgata, Unattached, Perfectly Enlightened, bestowed the prediction of the supreme authentic path, anuttarā-samyak-saṃbodhi, upon Akṣobhya Bodhisattva Mahāsattva, throughout the trisāhasra-mahāsāhasra-lokadhātu, both humans and non-humans all burned incense; similarly, it is with me, when I attained anuttarā-samyak-saṃbodhi and acquired prajñā, throughout the trisāhasra-mahāsāhasra-lokadhātu, both humans and non-humans all burned incense.

賢者舍利弗白佛言：「阿閦菩薩摩訶薩乃有是無極之德。」
The wise Śāriputra addressed the Buddha, saying, 'Akṣobhya Bodhisattva Mahāsattva indeed possesses boundless virtues.'

佛告舍利弗：「阿閦菩薩摩訶薩不但有功德，不獨大目如來授其決，如是不可稱說無央數功德得度無極。
The Buddha said to Śāriputra: 'Akṣobhya Bodhisattva Mahāsattva not only possesses merits, but also, not solely by the prediction granted by Mahavyūha Tathāgata, such innumerable merits that cannot be fully articulated lead to incomparable liberation.'

「復次，舍利弗！大目如來授阿閦菩薩摩訶薩無上正真道決時，諸天、阿須倫、世間人其意皆安隱，悉得其時；譬我亦如是，成無上正真道最正覺、得薩芸若慧時，諸天、阿脩羅、世間人意皆得安隱，悉得其時。
Furthermore, Śāriputra! When Mahavyūha Tathāgata granted the prediction of the supreme authentic path, anuttarā-samyak-saṃbodhi, to Akṣobhya Bodhisattva Mahāsattva, the minds of all gods, asuras, and people of the world were at peace and obtained that moment. Similarly, it was with me, when I attained anuttarā-samyak-saṃbodhi and acquired prajñā, the minds of all gods, asuras, and people of the world were at peace and obtained that moment.

「復次，舍利弗！其大目如來授阿閦菩薩摩訶薩無上正真道決時，和夷羅、鬼神常隨後護之：譬我亦如是，成無上正真道最正覺、得薩芸若慧時，和夷羅、鬼神常隨我後行。
Furthermore, Śāriputra! When Mahavyūha Tathāgata granted the prediction of the supreme authentic path, anuttarā-samyak-saṃbodhi, to Akṣobhya Bodhisattva Mahāsattva, the Nāgas and spirits always followed and protected him: Similarly, it was with me, when I attained anuttarā-samyak-saṃbodhi and acquired prajñā, the Nāgas and spirits always followed me.

「復次，舍利弗！大目如來授阿閦菩薩摩訶薩無上正真道最正覺、得薩芸若慧時，諸天、阿脩羅、世間人，以天華、天香供養之；譬我亦如是，成無上正真道最正覺、得薩芸若慧時，諸天、阿脩羅、世間人，以天華、天香來供養。
Furthermore, Śāriputra! When Mahavyūha Tathāgata granted the prediction of the supreme authentic enlightenment, anuttarā-samyak-saṃbodhi, and the attainment of prajñā to Akṣobhya Bodhisattva Mahāsattva, the gods, asuras, and people of the world made offerings with heavenly flowers and incense; similarly, it was with me, when I attained the supreme authentic enlightenment, anuttarā-samyak-saṃbodhi, and acquired prajñā, the gods, asuras, and people of the world came to make offerings with heavenly flowers and incense.

「復次，舍利弗！大目如來授阿閦菩薩摩訶薩無上正真道決時，二十億人及三十億諸天發無上正真道意，大目如來、無所著等正覺皆授其決。
"Furthermore, Śāriputra! When Mahavyūha Tathāgata granted the prediction of the supreme authentic enlightenment, anuttarā-samyak-saṃbodhi, to Akṣobhya Bodhisattva Mahāsattva, twenty billion people and thirty billion gods developed the intention towards the supreme authentic path. Mahavyūha Tathāgata, Unattached, Perfectly Enlightened, also granted them the prediction.

「復次，舍利弗！大目如來、無所著、等正覺授阿閦菩薩摩訶薩無上正真道決時，其地大動，自然生優鉢華、蓮華、拘文華、分陀利華布其地；譬我亦如是，成無上正真道最正覺、得薩芸若慧時，大地自然生優鉢華、蓮華、拘文華、分陀利華布其地。
"Furthermore, Śāriputra! When Mahavyūha Tathāgata, Unattached, Perfectly Enlightened, granted the prediction of the supreme authentic enlightenment, anuttarā-samyak-saṃbodhi, to Akṣobhya Bodhisattva Mahāsattva, the earth trembled greatly, and naturally, Utpala flowers, lotuses, Kumuda flowers, and Pundarīka flowers sprang up, covering the ground; similarly, it was with me, when I achieved the supreme authentic enlightenment, anuttarā-samyak-saṃbodhi, and acquired prajñā, the great earth naturally produced Utpala flowers, lotuses, Kumuda flowers, and Pundarīka flowers, covering the ground.

「復次，舍利弗！大目如來、無所著、等正覺授阿閦菩薩摩訶薩無上正真道決時，若干百天人、若干千天人、若干百千諸天人住於虛空，以天衣用散阿閦菩薩上，即說是言：『菩薩摩訶薩當度，成無上正真道最正覺也。』
Furthermore, Śāriputra! When Mahavyūha Tathāgata, Unattached, Perfectly Enlightened, granted the prediction of the supreme authentic enlightenment, anuttarā-samyak-saṃbodhi, to Akṣobhya Bodhisattva Mahāsattva, countless heavenly beings, numbering in the hundreds, thousands, and hundreds of thousands, resided in the sky, scattering celestial garments upon Akṣobhya Bodhisattva, and then proclaimed: 'The Bodhisattva Mahāsattva will cross over, achieving the supreme authentic enlightenment, anuttarā-samyak-saṃbodhi.'

「復次，舍利弗！大目如來授阿閦菩薩摩訶薩無上正真道決，爾時諸天、阿須羅、世間人民相愛劇父母哀其子；譬我亦如是，成無上正真道最正覺時，諸天、阿脩羅、世間人民相愛劇父母哀其子也。
Furthermore, Śāriputra! When Mahavyūha Tathāgata granted the prediction of the supreme authentic enlightenment, anuttarā-samyak-saṃbodhi, to Akṣobhya Bodhisattva Mahāsattva, at that time, gods, asuras, and the people of the world loved each other as intensely as parents mourning their child; similarly, it was with me, when I achieved the supreme authentic enlightenment, anuttarā-samyak-saṃbodhi, the gods, asuras, and the people of the world also loved each other as intensely as parents mourning their child.

「復次，舍利弗！大目如來授阿閦菩薩摩訶薩無上正真道決時，其三千大千世界中諸天及人民，承佛威神皆聞授阿閦菩薩決。
Furthermore, Śāriputra! When Mahavyūha Tathāgata granted the prediction of the supreme authentic enlightenment, anuttarā-samyak-saṃbodhi, to Akṣobhya Bodhisattva Mahāsattva, all gods and humans in the trisāhasra-mahāsāhasra-lokadhātu, under the Buddha's majestic power, all heard the granting of the prediction to Akṣobhya Bodhisattva.

「如是，舍利弗！昔授菩薩決時，其此國中人民一心布施，為福德快飲食，若有求索者已所喜而施與。譬我亦如是，成無上正真道最正覺時，是三千大千世界中諸天及人民皆承佛威神聞授決時。如是，舍利弗！昔此國中人民一心布施，為福德快飲食，若有求索者已所喜而施與。
Thus, Śāriputra! In ancient times, when a prediction was given to a Bodhisattva, the people of that country with a unified heart made offerings, delighting in virtue and happiness, willingly giving to those who asked. Similarly, it was with me, when I achieved the supreme authentic enlightenment, anuttarā-samyak-saṃbodhi, all gods and people within the trisāhasra-mahāsāhasra-lokadhātu, upon hearing the granting of the prediction, were under the influence of the Buddha's majestic power. In this way, Śāriputra! In the past, the people of this country made offerings with a unified heart, delighting in virtue and happiness, gladly giving to those who sought.

「復次，舍利弗！其大目如來授阿閦菩薩摩訶薩無上正覺道決時，諸欲界天悉鼓天伎樂供養。
Furthermore, Śāriputra! When Mahavyūha Tathāgata granted the prediction for the path to supreme enlightenment, anuttarā-samyak-saṃbodhi, to Akṣobhya Bodhisattva Mahāsattva, all the gods of the desire realm played heavenly music as an offering.

「舍利弗！是阿閦菩薩摩訶薩授決時之功德行。」
Śāriputra! This is the meritorious deed associated with the moment when Akṣobhya Bodhisattva Mahāsattva was granted the prediction.

賢者舍利弗白佛言：「難及，天中天！如來、無所著、正覺誠諦說之——不可思議諸佛佛之境界、不可思議諸神神之境界、不可思議諸龍龍之境界。不可思議諸龍之境界——乃從阿閦菩薩摩訶薩初發意學受得此功德。天中天！是阿閦菩薩摩訶薩授決時亦不可思議。」
The wise Śāriputra addressed the Buddha, saying: 'Incomparable, Lord of the Heavens! The Tathāgata, Unattached, Perfectly Enlightened, has truly spoken of the inconceivable realms of Buddhas, the inconceivable realms of gods, the inconceivable realms of nāgas. The inconceivable realm of nāgas — which is attained from the initial resolve of learning by Akṣobhya Bodhisattva Mahāsattva, possesses such merit. Lord of the Heavens! The granting of the prediction to Akṣobhya Bodhisattva Mahāsattva is also inconceivable.'

是時賢者阿難謂賢者舍利弗：「阿閦菩薩摩訶薩初發意學僧那及得號如是也？」
At that time, the wise Ānanda said to the wise Śāriputra: 'Did Akṣobhya Bodhisattva Mahāsattva initially resolve to learn from the Sangha and thus receive such a title?'

舍利弗謂阿難言：「是皆有因緣所致，阿閦菩薩摩訶薩初發意學僧那及德號，今佛當廣解說之。」
Śāriputra said to Ānanda: 'All of these are brought about by causes and conditions. Akṣobhya Bodhisattva Mahāsattva’s initial resolve to learn from the Sangha and his virtuous title, the Buddha will now explain in detail.'

時佛告舍利弗言：「阿閦菩薩初發是意時可令虛空有異，我所結願不可使有異，被僧那僧涅乃如是。」
At that time, the Buddha said to Śāriputra: 'When Akṣobhya Bodhisattva first resolved with such determination, it was possible to make the empty sky unusual, but the vows I have made cannot cause any such anomaly, such is the nature of being embraced by the Sangha, the Sangha's nirvana.'

佛語舍利弗：「如阿閦菩薩摩訶薩所被僧那僧涅，寶英菩薩摩訶薩亦從阿閦菩薩學行。舍利弗！無央數菩薩不能及知阿閦菩薩所被僧那僧涅甚堅積累德行乃如是。
The Buddha said to Śāriputra: 'Just as Akṣobhya Bodhisattva Mahāsattva was embraced by the Sangha's nirvana, Ratnapani Bodhisattva Mahāsattva also followed Akṣobhya Bodhisattva’s practice. Śāriputra! Countless Bodhisattvas cannot match the firm accumulation of meritorious deeds characterized by being embraced by the Sangha's nirvana, as was done by Akṣobhya Bodhisattva.'

「舍利弗！其阿閦菩薩以成無上正真道也，最正覺，今現在阿比羅提世界。
Śāriputra! Having attained the supreme authentic path, the perfect enlightenment, Akṣobhya Bodhisattva currently resides in the Abhirati world.

「阿閦如來、無所著、等正覺行菩薩道時，世世人求手足、及頭、目、肌肉，終不逆人意也。
When Akṣobhya Tathāgata, Unattached, Perfectly Enlightened, was practicing the Bodhisattva path, in every lifetime people sought his hands, feet, head, eyes, and flesh, yet he never harbored any resentment towards them.

「舍利弗！阿閦如來從初發意至成無上正真道最正覺，不中有頭痛，亦無風氣、上隔之病。舍利弗！是阿閦如來、無所著、等正覺昔行菩薩道時甚難及、未曾有之法。
Śāriputra! From the time Akṣobhya Tathāgata first resolved his mind until achieving the supreme and perfect enlightenment, anuttarā-samyak-saṃbodhi, he did not suffer from headaches, nor did he experience disorders like wind ailments or obstructions. Śāriputra! This is a most rare and unparalleled practice that Akṣobhya Tathāgata, Unattached, Perfectly Enlightened, followed while walking the Bodhisattva path.

「阿閦如來昔行菩薩道時，世世見如來，一切常奉梵行，世世亦作，是名阿閦菩薩從一佛剎復遊一佛剎，所至到處目常見諸天中天生於彼。」
When Akṣobhya Tathāgata was practicing the Bodhisattva path in past lives, he always encountered Tathāgatas in every lifetime, continually practicing asceticism. In each life, he engaged in such practice, which is why it is said that Akṣobhya Bodhisattva traveled from one Buddha-field to another, and wherever he went, he invariably encountered celestial beings born there.

佛言：「舍利弗！譬如轉輪王得天下，所從一觀復至一觀足未曾蹈地，所至常以五樂自娛，得自在至盡壽。如是，舍利弗！阿閦如來行菩薩道行，世世常自見如來、無所著、等正覺、常修梵行，於彼所說法時一切皆行度無極，少有行弟子道。彼所行度無極為說法——有立於佛道者便勸助為現正，令歡喜踊躍，皆令修無上正真道——便發是大尊意：『彼說法時，諸所德本以願持作無上正真道。我持是德本願無上正真道成最正覺時說法，令我佛剎中諸菩薩摩訶薩，佛說法時承佛威神皆受、諷誦、持之。諷誦已，是諸菩薩摩訶薩從一佛剎復遊一佛剎，意常樂諸佛、天中天，至成無上正真道最正覺。我亦如是，從一佛剎復遊一佛剎，即住於兜術天得一生補處之法。』」
The Buddha said, 'Śāriputra! Imagine a Wheel-Turning Monarch who rules over the earth, whose feet never touch the ground from one palace to another, constantly amusing themselves with five pleasures, living life freely until the end of their days. Similarly, Śāriputra! As Akṣobhya Tathāgata practiced the Bodhisattva way, in every life, he always saw the Tathāgata, Unattached, Perfectly Enlightened, constantly engaged in ascetic practices. Whenever he preached the Dharma, all would walk the ultimate path, few undertaking the path of the disciples. Those walking the ultimate path preached the Dharma—encouraging those established in the Buddha way, making them joyous and jubilant, all cultivating the supreme authentic path—thus emerged this great reverence: 'When he preached the Dharma, all virtues were intended to uphold the supreme authentic path. When I uphold these virtues and vow for the supreme authentic path to achieve the most perfect enlightenment, may all Bodhisattva Mahāsattvas in my Buddha-field, upon hearing the Dharma preached under the influence of the Buddha’s majestic power, receive, chant, and uphold it. Having chanted, may these Bodhisattva Mahāsattvas travel from one Buddha-field to another, always delighting in the Buddhas, the Lords of the Heavens, until achieving the supreme, authentic enlightenment. Similarly, I too travel from one Buddha-field to another, then residing in the realm of the Tusita heavens to obtain the method for once more taking up existence.'

佛復語舍利弗：「如是，諸菩薩摩訶薩從兜術天自以神力下入母腹中，從右脇生。菩薩生墮地時，地為大動，以修行有是應。菩薩在母腹中時都無有臭處、亦無惡露、亦無不可意。」
The Buddha continued saying to Śāriputra: 'Thus, Bodhisattva Mahāsattvas, through their own supernatural powers, descend from the Tusita heaven into their mothers' wombs, and are born from the right side. When a Bodhisattva is born, the earth trembles greatly, an occurrence that befits their practice. While in their mothers' wombs, there is no foul odor, nor any impurities, nor anything unpleasant.'

時佛語舍利弗：「譬如神通比丘若入絞露精舍，於虛空中遊行周匝，虛空中行於絞露精舍無所觸礙。如是，舍利弗！菩薩入母腹中時，如在虛空中遊觀周匝，無所觸礙、亦無臭處。其阿閦如來昔行菩薩道時如是；我亦如是，行無上正真道時一切皆破壞魔事，我如是成無上正真道最正覺。
At that time, the Buddha said to Śāriputra: 'Just as a monk with supernatural powers, entering the Gandhakuti (fragrant chamber), moves around in the empty sky, his movement within the Gandhakuti unhindered by anything. Similarly, Śāriputra! When a Bodhisattva enters the mother's womb, it is as if moving around in the empty sky, unhindered by anything and without any foul odor. It was the same when Akṣobhya Tathāgata was practicing the Bodhisattva path; and so it was for me, when practicing the supreme authentic path, all demonic obstacles were destroyed, and thus I achieved the supreme, authentic enlightenment, anuttarā-samyak-saṃbodhi.'

「阿閦佛剎求菩薩道及弟子道者皆破壞諸惡、降伏眾魔，一切皆盡，其佛剎人民不復作魔事：『我當修是佛道至得出家學道。』」
In the Buddha-field of Akṣobhya, those seeking the Bodhisattva path as well as the path of disciples all destroy evils and subdue all demons, extinguishing them completely; the people of this Buddha-field no longer engage in demonic activities, thinking, 'I shall practice the Buddha way to the point of leaving household life to pursue the path.'

佛語舍利弗：「阿閦如來、無所著、等正覺昔行菩薩道聽說法時，其身不生疲極、意亦不念疲極。舍利弗！阿閦如來昔求菩薩道，聽說法時：『如是好法，令我佛剎中諸菩薩摩訶薩好法如是。』」
The Buddha said to Śāriputra: "When Akṣobhya Tathāgata, Unattached, Perfectly Enlightened, was practicing the Bodhisattva path and listened to the Dharma, his body did not experience extreme fatigue, nor did his mind entertain thoughts of extreme weariness. Śāriputra! When Akṣobhya Tathāgata was seeking the Bodhisattva path and listened to the Dharma, he thought: 'May such good Dharma be present in my Buddha-field, enabling all Bodhisattva Mahāsattvas therein to encounter such good Dharma as well.'"

阿閦佛剎善快品第二
Chapter Two of the Excellent Joyous Land of Akṣobhya Buddha.

賢者舍利弗白佛言：「天中天！是阿閦如來、無所著、等正覺昔行德號時以成號阿閦如來。甚善。天中天！願佛當復廣說其佛剎之善快。所以者何？若有求菩薩道者，聞知彼佛剎之善快及阿閦如來所現行教授；若復有求弟子道未得度者，聞彼佛剎之善快及阿閦如來所現教授恭敬清淨之行。」
The wise Śāriputra said to the Buddha: 'Lord of the Heavens! That Akṣobhya Tathāgata, Unattached, Perfectly Enlightened, was thus named Akṣobhya Tathāgata during his practice of virtuous deeds. Excellent! Lord of the Heavens! I wish for the Buddha to further expound on the excellent joy of his Buddha-field. Why is this? Because if those seeking the Bodhisattva path hear of the joyous qualities of that Buddha-field and how Akṣobhya Tathāgata manifested teachings and guidance, as well as for those seeking the disciple's path who have not yet been liberated, hearing of the Buddha-field’s joy and Akṣobhya Tathāgata's presentation of respectful and pure conduct.'

佛言：「善哉，善哉。舍利弗！所問甚善，汝問佛義快乃如是念阿閦佛剎之善快。
The Buddha said, "Excellent, excellent. Śāriputra! Your question is very good. You inquire about the joy found in the Dharma for precisely such a reason as to contemplate the excellent joy of Akṣobhya's Buddha-field."

「阿閦如來成無上正真道最正覺、得薩芸若慧時，其三千大千世界皆為大明，地六反震動。
"When Akṣobhya Tathāgata achieved the supreme authentic enlightenment, the most perfect awakening, and acquired prajñā wisdom, the entire trisāhasra-mahāsāhasra-lokadhātu was illuminated brightly, and the earth trembled six times."

「阿閦如來成最正覺時，其三千大千世界中諸人民，七日不食飲、亦不妄食飲、亦不妄諛諂、身亦無疲極之想。如是也，俱想念安隱好，喜相愛敬，歡喜意以得時念。爾時，諸人民、諸欲天皆棄穢濁思想。所以者何？用阿閦如來昔時願所致得是德號，其三千大千世界一切人民叉手向阿閦如來。其佛剎如是，無央數佛剎不及是阿閦佛剎之善快。
"When Akṣobhya Tathāgata achieved the most perfect enlightenment, the people throughout the trisāhasra-mahāsāhasra-lokadhātu refrained from eating and drinking for seven days; they also did not engage in insincere eating and drinking or in empty flattery, nor did they harbor thoughts of extreme fatigue. In this manner, all harbored thoughts of peace and goodness, mutual love and respect, and joyfulness with a sense of timeliness. At that time, all the people and gods of desire abandoned their impure and polluted thoughts. Why is this? Because the virtues that led to Akṣobhya Tathāgata's attainment of this title in ancient times brought about such an effect, causing all the people in the trisāhasra-mahāsāhasra-lokadhātu to join their hands towards Akṣobhya Tathāgata. Such is his Buddha-field, incomparable in joy to countless other Buddha-fields."

「舍利弗！是為阿閦如來昔行菩薩道之所願而有持。諸菩薩摩訶薩所願有持者，佛佛剎便善快。」
"Śāriputra! This was upheld through the aspiration of Akṣobhya Tathāgata while he was practicing the Bodhisattva path. For those Bodhisattva Mahāsattvas who uphold such an aspiration, their Buddha-fields are indeed filled with joy."

佛語舍利弗：「我昔行菩薩道時，如所願今自然得之。阿閦如來成無上正真道最正覺時，其三千大千世界諸人民得天眼者、未得天眼者皆見其光明。舍利弗！是為阿閦如來昔行菩薩道時所願而有持。」
The Buddha said to Śāriputra: "When I was practicing the Bodhisattva path in the past, as I had wished, I naturally achieved it. When Akṣobhya Tathāgata attained supreme authentic enlightenment, anuttarā-samyak-saṃbodhi, all the people in the trisāhasra-mahāsāhasra-lokadhātu, both those who had achieved the divine eye and those who had not, saw its radiance. Śāriputra! This was because of the aspiration held by Akṣobhya Tathāgata while he was practicing the Bodhisattva path."

佛復語舍利弗：「阿閦如來成無上正真道最正覺往詣佛樹時，諸憋魔不能發念，何況當復能往嬈薩芸若慧？舍利弗！是為阿閦如來昔行菩薩道時所願而有持。
The Buddha further said to Śāriputra: "When Akṣobhya Tathāgata was proceeding to the Bodhi tree to achieve the supreme authentic enlightenment, anuttarā-samyak-saṃbodhi, all the Māras were incapable of forming any malicious thoughts, let alone hinder his attainment of prajñā wisdom. Śāriputra! This was because of the aspiration held by Akṣobhya Tathāgata while he was practicing the Bodhisattva path."

「復次，舍利弗！阿閦如來成無上正真道最正覺、得薩芸若慧時，無央數那術億百千諸天人於虛空住，以天華、天栴檀、雜香、天搗香、伎樂供養，散阿閦佛上。供養已，其天華、天香、天搗香、天栴檀香、天雜香悉於虛空中合住，化成圓華蓋。舍利弗！是為阿閦如來昔行菩薩道時所願而有持。
The Buddha further said to Śāriputra: "When Akṣobhya Tathāgata achieved the supreme authentic enlightenment, anuttarā-samyak-saṃbodhi, and attained prajñā wisdom, countless deities residing in the empty sky offered heavenly flowers, sandalwood, mixed fragrances, pounded incense, and celestial music as offerings across Akṣobhya Buddha. After the offerings were made, the heavenly flowers, celestial fragrances, pounded incense, sandalwood aroma, and mixed fragrances all combined in the empty sky, transforming into a canopy of flowers. Śāriputra! This was because of the aspiration held by Akṣobhya Tathāgata while he was practicing the Bodhisattva path."

「阿閦如來光明皆照明三千大千世界常明，阿閦如來光明悉蔽日、月之光明，及一切諸天光明皆令滅，使人民不復見日、月之明。舍利弗！是為阿閦如來昔行菩薩道時所願而有持。」
"The radiance of Akṣobhya Tathāgata illuminated the entire trisāhasra-mahāsāhasra-lokadhātu continuously, overshadowing the light of the sun, the moon, and all celestial lights, making them dim so that the people could no longer see the brilliance of the sun or the moon. Śāriputra! This was due to the aspiration held by Akṣobhya Tathāgata while he was practicing the Bodhisattva path."

賢者舍利弗白佛言：「天中天！阿閦如來、無所著、等正覺昔行菩薩道時，以被是大僧那僧涅乃作是願？」
The wise Śāriputra said to the Buddha: "Lord of the Heavens! When Akṣobhya Tathāgata, Unattached, Perfectly Enlightened, was practicing the Bodhisattva path, was it then that he made such a vow, being embraced by the great Sangha’s nirvana?"

佛言：「昔行菩薩道時，若干百千人、不可復計無央數人積累德本，於無上正真道持是積累德本，願作佛道及淨其佛剎，如所願欲嚴其佛剎即亦具足其願。
The Buddha said: "While practicing the Bodhisattva path in the past, hundreds of thousands of people, an incalculable and countless number, accumulated a foundation of virtues. Holding this accumulation of virtues towards the supreme authentic path, they aspired to pursue the Buddha-way and purify their Buddha-fields. Just as they wished to enrich their Buddha-fields, their aspirations were indeed fulfilled."

「復次，舍利弗！阿閦佛樹以七寶作之，高四十里，周匝二十里，其枝葉旁行四十里，其枝下垂，其欄楯繞樹，周匝五百六十里，阿閦如來於其樹下得薩芸若慧。」
Furthermore, Śāriputra! The Bodhi tree of Akṣobhya was made of the seven treasures, standing forty leagues high and twenty leagues in circumference, with its branches extending outward for forty leagues. The branches drooped down, and its railing circled the tree, encompassing five hundred and sixty leagues. Underneath this tree, Akṣobhya Tathāgata attained prajñā wisdom.

佛語舍利弗：「如世間巧人鼓百種音樂，其聲不如阿閦佛剎中梯陛樹木之音聲——風適起吹梯陛，樹木相叩作悲聲。」
The Buddha said to Śāriputra: "Just as a skilled musician in the world can play a hundred kinds of music, their sounds do not compare to the sounds of the trees in the Buddha-field of Akṣobhya when the wind blows through them—the trees gently knock against each other, producing sorrowful sounds."

佛語舍利弗：「聽說阿閦如來、無所著、等正覺剎中之淨快，諦聽，善思念之，今當為汝說之。」
The Buddha said to Śāriputra: "Listen carefully to the pure joy within the Buddha-field of Akṣobhya Tathāgata, Unattached, Perfectly Enlightened. Pay close attention, contemplate it well, for I will now speak of it to you."

賢者舍利弗言：「唯然，世尊！願樂欲聞。」

佛言：「阿閦如來剎中無有三惡道。何等為三？一者、泥犁，二者、禽獸，三者、薜荔。一切人皆行善事。
The wise Śāriputra said, "Indeed, World-Honored One! I wish and am pleased to hear."

「其地平正，生樹木無有高下，無有山陵嵠谷、亦無有礫石崩山。其地，行足蹈其上即減，這舉足便還復如故。譬如綩綖枕頭，枕其上即為減，這舉頭便還復如故；其地如是。
"The ground is level and even, with trees growing without disparity in height. There are no mountains or hills, ravines or valleys, nor are there any pebbles or crumbling rocks. The land, when trodden upon, yields underfoot but immediately returns to its original state upon lifting one's foot. Just like a silk cushion, when you rest upon it, it compresses, and when you rise, it returns to its original form; such is the nature of this land."

「其佛剎無有三病。何等為三？一者、風，二者、寒，三者、氣。
"The Buddha-field is free from the three ailments. What are the three? First is wind, second is cold, and third is dampness."

「其佛剎人一切皆無有惡色者、亦無有醜者，其婬、怒、癡薄，其佛剎人民皆悉無有牢獄拘閉之事，一切皆無有眾邪異道。
"In his Buddha-field, all people are devoid of any unpleasant appearance or ugliness; desires, anger, and ignorance are slight. The inhabitants of the Buddha-field are completely free from imprisonment or confinement, and all are without the various erroneous and heterodox paths."

「其剎中樹木常有花實，人民皆從樹取五色衣被，眾共用著之，其衣被甚姝好，無敗色者。」
"In this Buddha-field, the trees are always in bloom and bear fruit; the people obtain garments of five colors from the trees, which they all wear. These garments are exceedingly beautiful and never fade."

佛語舍利弗：「人民所著衣香譬如天華之香，其飯食香美如天樹香，無有絕時。
The Buddha said to Śāriputra: "The fragrance of the garments worn by the people is like that of heavenly flowers, and the scent of their food is as delightful as that of celestial trees, never ceasing."

「諸人民著無央數種種衣被，其佛剎人民隨所念食即自然在前。譬如，舍利弗！忉利天人隨所念食即自然在前。如是，其剎人民隨所念欲得何食即自然在前，人民無有貪於飲食者。
The Buddha explained to Śāriputra: "The people wear countless varieties of garments, and in this Buddha-field, the food they think of appears before them naturally. Just as, Śāriputra, the gods of the Trāyastriṃśa heaven have food appear before them as soon as they think of it. In the same way, the inhabitants of this Buddha-field have whatever food they wish for appear naturally before them, yet the people do not harbor greed for food and drink."

「復次，舍利弗！其佛剎人民所臥起處以七寶為交露精舍，滿無有空缺處。
The Buddha further said to Śāriputra: "Moreover, Śāriputra, the places where the people of this Buddha-field lie down and rise are made of the seven treasures, forming pavilions of interwoven jewels, completely without any gaps."

「其浴池中有八味水，人民眾共用之，其水轉相灌注，諸人民終不失善法行。
The Buddha further explained to Śāriputra: "The bathing pools in this Buddha-field contain water of eight different qualities, which all the people share. The water flows, replenishing itself, and the people never stray from the practice of the good Dharma."

「譬如，舍利弗！玉女寶過踰凡女人不及，其德如天女。如是，舍利弗！其佛剎女人德欲比玉女寶者，玉女寶不及其佛剎女人百倍、千倍、萬倍、億倍、巨億萬倍不與等。
The Buddha illustrated to Śāriputra: "Just as, Śāriputra, a precious gem surpasses ordinary women and is incomparable in value, its virtues akin to those of heavenly maidens. Similarly, Śāriputra, when comparing the virtues of the women of this Buddha-field to those of a precious gem, the gem does not come close to matching the virtues of the Buddha-field's women by hundreds, thousands, tens of thousands, hundreds of millions, or even by trillions of times."

「人民以七寶為床，上布好綩綖，悉福德致自然為生。
The Buddha described: "The people use beds made of the seven treasures, covered with fine silk, naturally giving rise to complete virtue and happiness."

「舍利弗！是阿閦如來、無所著、等正覺昔行菩薩道時所願而有持，阿閦佛以福德所致成佛剎如是比。」
The Buddha stated to Śāriputra: "Śāriputra! This was upheld through the aspiration of Akṣobhya Tathāgata, Unattached, Perfectly Enlightened, while he was practicing the Bodhisattva path. Thus, by virtue and merit, Akṣobhya Buddha brought about such a Buddha-field in comparison."

佛復語舍利弗言：「其剎中人民飯食勝於天人飯食，其食色、香、味亦勝天人所食。
The Buddha further said to Śāriputra: "The food consumed by the people within this Buddha-field surpasses that of the heavenly beings; its color, fragrance, and taste are also superior to the food eaten by the heavenly beings."

「其剎中無有王，但有法王——佛、天中天。」
"In this Buddha-field, there is no king, but there is a King of the Dharma—the Buddha, the Lord of the Heavens."

佛言：「舍利弗！譬如欝單越天下人民無有王治；如是，舍利弗！阿閦如來、無所著、等正覺佛剎無有王，但有阿閦如來、天中天——法王。
The Buddha said, "Śāriputra! Just as the Udumbara flowers bloom and the people under them have no sovereign ruler; similarly, Śāriputra! In the Buddha-field of Akṣobhya Tathāgata, Unattached, Perfectly Enlightened, there is no king, but there is Akṣobhya Tathāgata, the Lord of the Heavens—the King of the Dharma."

「譬如忉利天帝釋於坐這發念，諸天便來受其教。舍利弗！是為阿閦如來佛剎之善快。
The Buddha said, "Just as, when Indra of the Trāyastriṃśa Heaven has an intention while sitting on his throne, all the gods come to receive his teachings. Śāriputra! This is the joy of Akṣobhya Tathāgata’s Buddha-field."

「其剎人民不從婬欲之事。所以者何？用是阿閦如來真人法御天中天所致。
The people of his Buddha-field do not engage in lustful acts. Why is this? It is because of the true Dharma of Akṣobhya Tathāgata, the sovereign of the Dharma in the heavens, that brings this about.

「舍利弗！是為阿閦如來昔行菩薩道時願所致令佛剎善快。」
Śāriputra! This is due to the aspiration made by Akṣobhya Tathāgata while he was practicing the Bodhisattva path, which has led to the Buddha-field being filled with joy.

爾時，有異比丘聞說彼佛剎之功德，即於中起婬欲意，前白佛言：「天中天！我願欲往生彼佛剎。」
At that time, a certain monk, upon hearing of the merits of that Buddha-field, developed thoughts of lust and then approached the Buddha, saying, "Lord of the Heavens! I wish to be reborn in that Buddha-field."

佛便告其比丘言：「癡人！汝不得生彼佛剎。所以者何？不以立婬欲亂意者得生彼佛剎，用餘善行、法清淨行得生彼佛剎。」
The Buddha promptly said to that monk, "Foolish one! You cannot be born in that Buddha-field. Why is this? It is not possible to be born in that Buddha-field by harboring lustful and disordered intentions. It is through other virtuous actions and the practice of pure Dharma that one can be born in that Buddha-field."

佛語舍利弗：「阿閦如來佛剎有八味水，是諸人民所為悉共用之，人民意念欲令自然浴池有八味水滿其中，用人民故即自然有浴池有八味水滿其中；意念欲令水轉流行便轉流行、意欲令滅不現即滅不現。
The Buddha said to Śāriputra: "In the Buddha-field of Akṣobhya Tathāgata, there are bathing pools containing water of eight qualities, which all the people share and use together. When the people wish for the natural pools to be filled with the eight qualities of water, for the sake of the people, the pools naturally become filled with water containing those eight qualities. When they wish for the water to circulate, it circulates; and when they wish for it to disappear, it disappears."

「其佛剎亦不大寒、亦不大熱，風徐起甚香快。是風用諸天、龍、人民故，隨所念風便起——若一人念欲令風起自吹，風即獨吹之；意念不欲令風起，風便不起——風起時不動人身，風隨人所念起。舍利弗！是為阿閦如來佛剎之善快如昔時所願。」
The Buddha explained to Śāriputra: "In the Buddha-field of Akṣobhya, it is neither too cold nor too hot, and when the wind arises, it is very fragrant and pleasing. This wind is for the gods, dragons, and people, and it arises according to their thoughts—when an individual wishes the wind to blow, it blows solely for them; if they do not wish for the wind to arise, then it does not. When the wind does arise, it does not disturb the body; the wind moves according to the thoughts of the people. Śāriputra! This is the joy of Akṣobhya Tathāgata’s Buddha-field as it was intended in ancient times."

佛語舍利弗：「阿閦如來佛剎，女人意欲得珠璣、瓔珞者便於樹上取著之，欲得衣被者亦從樹上取衣之。舍利弗！其佛剎女人無有女人之態，如我剎中女人之態也。舍利弗！我剎女人態云何？我剎女人惡色醜、惡舌、嫉妬於法、意著邪事。我剎女人有是諸態，彼佛剎女人無有是態。所以者何？用阿閦如來昔時願所致。」
The Buddha said to Śāriputra: "In the Buddha-field of Akṣobhya, if women wish to obtain pearls or necklaces, they simply take them from trees, and if they wish for garments, they also take clothes from the trees. Śāriputra! The women in his Buddha-field do not display the characteristics typical of women in my field. And what are the characteristics of women in my field? The women in my field have unattractive appearances, harsh speech, jealousy towards the Dharma, and are inclined towards wrongful deeds. The women in my field possess these traits, but the women in that Buddha-field do not. Why is this? It is due to the aspiration made by Akṣobhya Tathāgata in ancient times."

佛復語舍利弗：「阿閦佛剎，女人妊身產時，身不疲極、意不念疲極，但念安隱，亦無有苦。其女人一切亦無有諸苦，亦無有臭處惡露。舍利弗！是為阿閦如來昔時願所致得是善法，其佛剎無有能及者。
The Buddha further said to Śāriputra: "In Akṣobhya's Buddha-field, when women give birth, they do not experience extreme fatigue, neither physically nor mentally; they only think of peace and are without suffering. These women are entirely free from all forms of suffering and from any foul or unpleasant conditions. Śāriputra! This excellent Dharma is the result of the aspiration made by Akṣobhya Tathāgata in the past, and no other Buddha-field can match this."

「舍利弗！阿閦佛剎人民無有治生者、亦無有販賣往來者，人民但共同快樂，安定寂行。其佛剎人不著愛欲、婬妷，以因緣自然愛樂。其剎風起吹梯陛樹便作悲音聲。舍利弗！極好五音聲不及阿閦佛剎風吹梯陛樹木之音聲也。舍利弗！是為阿閦如來昔行佛道時所願而有持。」
The Buddha told Śāriputra: "In Akṣobhya's Buddha-field, the people do not engage in making a living or trade. Instead, the populace shares in communal happiness and lives in peaceful tranquility. The inhabitants of the Buddha-field do not cling to sensual desires or indulgence; their love and joy arise naturally through conditions. When the wind stirs the branches of the stairway trees, it produces a sorrowful sound. Śāriputra! Even the finest melodies of the five musical notes do not compare to the sound of the wind sweeping through the stairway trees in Akṣobhya's Buddha-field. Śāriputra! This was the aspiration Akṣobhya Tathāgata held while practicing the Buddha path in the past."

佛語舍利弗：「若有菩薩摩訶薩欲取嚴淨佛剎者，當如阿閦佛昔行菩薩道時所願嚴淨取其剎。」
The Buddha said to Śāriputra: "If there are Bodhisattva Mahāsattvas who wish to obtain a pure and disciplined Buddha-field, they should cultivate and purify their Buddha-field just as Akṣobhya Bodhisattva aspired to do while practicing the Bodhisattva path in the past."

佛復語舍利弗：「阿閦佛剎無有日、月光明所照，亦無有窈冥之處、亦無有罣礙。所以者何？用阿閦如來、無所著、等正覺光明皆照三千大千世界常明。譬如絞露精舍堅閉門，風不得入，好細塗以白堊之，持摩尼寶著其中，其珠便以光明照，其中諸人民晝夜承其光明。如是，舍利弗！其阿閦如來、無所著、等正覺光明常照三千大千世界。舍利弗！絞露精舍者，謂是阿比羅提世界也；摩尼寶者，謂是阿閦如來也；摩尼寶光明者，謂是阿閦如來之光明也；精舍中人者，謂是阿閦佛剎中人民安樂者也。」
The Buddha further said to Śāriputra: "There is no need for the light of the sun or the moon to illuminate Akṣobhya's Buddha-field, nor are there any places of deep darkness or obstructions. Why is this? Because the radiant light of Akṣobhya Tathāgata, Unattached, Perfectly Enlightened, illuminates the entire trisāhasra-mahāsāhasra-lokadhātu constantly. Just as in the Gandhakuti (fragrant chamber) with tightly closed doors, where the wind cannot enter, finely coated with white lime, and when a wish-fulfilling jewel is placed within, its brilliance illuminates everything, and all the people therein are bathed in its light day and night. Similarly, Śāriputra! The radiant light of Akṣobhya Tathāgata, Unattached, Perfectly Enlightened, constantly illuminates the trisāhasra-mahāsāhasra-lokadhātu. Śāriputra! The Gandhakuti here refers to the world of Abhirati; the wish-fulfilling jewel refers to Akṣobhya Tathāgata; the brilliance of the wish-fulfilling jewel refers to the light of Akṣobhya Tathāgata; and the people inside the chamber refer to the content and joyful inhabitants of Akṣobhya's Buddha-field."

佛語舍利弗：「阿閦如來行所至處，於足迹下地自然生千葉金色蓮華。舍利弗！是為阿閦如來昔行菩薩道時所願而有待。」
The Buddha said to Śāriputra: "Wherever Akṣobhya Tathāgata walked, golden lotuses with a thousand petals naturally sprung up under his footsteps. Śāriputra! This was due to the aspiration Akṣobhya Tathāgata held while he was practicing the Bodhisattva path in the past."

賢者舍利弗問佛言：「阿閦如來、無所著、等正覺入殿舍時，自然生千葉金色蓮華耶？為在所至處自然生乎？」


佛告賢者舍利弗：「阿閦如來若入郡國、縣邑，所至到處亦等如入殿舍時也，亦自然生千葉金色蓮華。若善男子、善女人意念欲令入殿舍足下自然生蓮華者，皆使蓮華合聚一處便合聚；意欲令上在虛空中，承佛威神，其蓮華用人民故，便上在虛空中而羅列成行。」

佛復語舍利弗：「其三千大千世界乃如是，阿閦如來、無所著、等正覺若遣化人到他方異世界，彼亦自然生——以佛威神所致，其三千大千世界以七寶金色蓮華而莊嚴之。」

阿閦佛國經弟子學成品第三

佛復語舍利弗：「阿閦如來說法時，於一一說法之中，不可計無央數人隨律之行，至有作阿羅漢道證者，如是比無央數諸弟子聚會及復得八惟務禪者，阿閦如來佛剎諸弟子眾不可復計。」

佛語舍利弗：「我都不見持計者與挍計巨能計數其眾會者也。以脫重擔，離於牢獄，遠於波頭犁、阿羅羅犁、阿比舍犁、阿優陀犁，如是，舍利弗！眾會不可計數諸善男子，是弟子智慧無央數不可計眾，在須陀洹、斯陀含、阿那含、阿羅漢道也。若懈怠者，得須陀洹為七生、七死；於是說法時，其人為不得上持為七生、七死。

「阿閦如來說法時，第一說法作須陀洹道證、第二說法作斯陀含道證、第三說法作阿那含道證、第四說法作阿羅漢道證者。其佛剎謂是善男子為懈怠，用不一坐聽法作阿羅漢道證故。

「其剎須陀洹不復七上下生死，便於人間坐禪得三昧；須陀洹即於彼自以威神力作阿羅漢道證；其剎斯陀含不復往還世間，以棄眾苦便於彼得三昧，斯陀含便於其剎自以威神力作阿羅漢道證；其剎阿那含不復上生波羅尼蜜和耶越天，便於彼自以威神力作阿羅漢道證；其剎阿羅漢不上下，便於彼至無餘泥洹界般泥洹。其剎說沙門四道，如是至令得道住。」

佛言：「舍利弗！若善男子、善女人於法自在者不復失學住、亦不失學餘事，如是於不學地便般泥洹也——無所學地謂是阿羅漢地。舍利弗！是為阿閦如來、無所著、等正覺剎諸弟子學成，無有麁立在上好要處者，謂是阿閦如來剎弟子眾阿羅漢也——生死已斷，所作而辦，所當為者以脫重擔，便得所有，盡壞勤苦牢獄之事，以中正解，復知八維無禪。阿羅漢行八維無禪，舍利弗！是為阿閦如來剎弟子之善行，是為阿羅漢之功德所為福行。

「其剎以三寶為梯陛——一者、金，二者、銀，三者、琉璃——從忉利天下至閻浮利地。其忉利天欲至阿閦如來所時從是梯陛下，忉利天人樂供養於天下人民，言：『如我天上所有欲比天下人民者，天上所有大不如天下，及復有阿閦如來、無所著、等正覺也。』」

佛語舍利弗：「忉利天人樂供養天下人民，天下人若上至忉利天者便不樂供養忉利天人。所以者何？我天下佛說經，如我天下所有，於是天上無也，不如我天下所有，我天下樂供養有佛。

「忉利天見天下人民，天下人遙見忉利天宮殿，譬如此剎天下人遙見日、月、星辰殿舍。如是，舍利弗！其佛剎天下人遙見諸天宮殿如是及欲行天，承佛威神所致，是為阿閦如來佛剎所有善快。」

佛復語舍利弗：「阿閦如來佛剎三千大千世界皆說法，四輩弟子滿三千大千世界無空缺。阿閦佛剎弟子意不念：『今日當於何食？今日誰當與我食？』亦不行家家乞。時到，飯食便辦，滿鉢自然在前，即取食。食已，鉢便自然去，其剎飯食如是。諸弟子不復行求衣鉢也，亦不裁衣、亦不縫衣、亦不浣衣、亦不染衣、亦不作衣、亦不教人作，以佛威神所致，同共安樂自然生。

「阿閦如來不為諸弟子說罪事——如我為諸弟子說十四句法——阿閦如來不為諸弟子說如是之法。所以者何？其剎無有行惡者。

「阿閦佛不復授諸弟子戒。所以者何？其佛剎人無有短命者、亦無蔽惡人、無有穢濁劫、亦無有諸結、無有穢濁，見其剎以除諸惡、穢濁。」

佛復語舍利弗：「阿閦佛說法時，諸弟子便度於習欲。所以者何？已棄於惡道故，其剎眾弟子終無有貢高、憍慢。不如此剎諸弟子於精舍行律，其剎弟子無有作是行者也。所以者何？舍利弗！用其人民善本具故，所說法、悔過各得其所。其剎不說五逆之事，一切皆斷諸逆已。諸弟子不貪飲食、亦不貪衣鉢、亦不貪眾欲、亦不貪著也，為說善事。所以者何？用少欲知止足故。

「舍利弗！阿閦佛不復授諸弟子戒——如我於此授諸弟子戒。所以者何？其剎無有惡者，是諸弟子但以苦、空、非常、非身，以是為戒。其剎亦無有受戒事，譬如是剎正士於我法中剃除鬚髮、少欲而受我戒。所以者何？其阿閦佛剎諸弟子得自在聚會，無有怨仇。

「舍利弗！阿閦佛剎諸弟子不共作行便獨行道，不樂共行，但行諸善。其剎無有過精進者，亦不可見懈怠者。舍利弗！是為阿閦如來佛剎出家諸弟子之德行。」

佛語舍利弗：「阿閦如來為諸弟子說法時，弟子不左右顧視，一心聽經——中有住聽經者，身不知罷極；中有坐聽經者，身亦不知罷極、意亦不念罷極也。

「阿閦如來於虛空中說法時，諸弟子悉聽之，是時得神足比丘、未得神足比丘——承佛威神——皆於虛空中行而聽法。是諸弟子於虛空中以三品作行。何等三？一者、住，二者、經，三者、坐。

「中有坐般泥洹波藍坐居而般泥洹者，諸弟子皆般泥洹，時地即為大動，般泥洹已，諸天、人民共供養之；中有阿羅漢身中自出火還燒身而般泥洹；中有阿羅漢般泥洹時，自以功德行如疾風；中有譬如五色雲氣於空中行便不復知處；中有弟子自以功德便沒去，不復知處，般泥洹如是；中有般泥洹時於虛空身中放水，其水不墮地便滅不現。其剎如是清淨，令身滅不現；其剎如是清淨，令身滅不現而般泥洹。諸弟子般泥洹如是也，舍利弗！是為阿閦如來、無所著、等正覺昔行菩薩道時所願而有持成無上正真道，諸弟子以是三品般泥洹。

「復次，舍利弗！阿閦如來佛剎諸弟子——無央數不可計諸弟子——少有不具足四解之事者，多有得四解事具足者；諸弟子少有不得四神足安隱行者，多有得四禪足安隱行者。舍利弗！是為阿閦如來佛剎諸弟子所成德行。」

賢者舍利弗白佛言：「阿閦如來、無所著、等正覺佛剎，諸弟子所行皆無極也。」

阿閦佛國經卷上
