#----------------------------------------------------------------------
#【經文資訊】大正新脩大藏經 第 17 冊 No. 721 正法念處經
#【版本記錄】發行日期：2023-12，最後更新：2023-09-23
#【編輯說明】本資料庫由 財團法人佛教電子佛典基金會（CBETA）依「大正新脩大藏經」所編輯
#【原始資料】蕭鎮國大德提供，維習安大德提供之高麗藏 CD 經文，北美某大德提供，Jaero Chen 提供新式標點
#【其他事項】本資料庫可自由免費流通，詳細內容請參閱【財團法人佛教電子佛典基金會資料庫版權宣告】
#----------------------------------------------------------------------

正法念處經卷第六十四
Sutra on the Subtle Dharma Foundation of Mindfulness, Scroll Sixty-Four

元魏婆羅門瞿曇般若流支譯
Translated by the Brahmin Gautama Prajñā in the Eastern Wei Dynasty

身念處品第七初
Section on the Mindfulness of the Body, Seventh Initial

爾時，世尊遊王舍城，在那羅帝婆羅門聚落，告諸比丘：「我今為汝說身念處，初善、中善、後善，善義善味純備具足，清淨梵行，所謂身念處法門。汝今諦聽，善思念之，當為汝說。」
At that time, the World-Honored One was wandering in the city of Rājagṛha, in the Brahmin settlement of Nālā, and he addressed the monks: "I will now teach you the body as a basis of mindfulness, with wholesome qualities in the beginning, middle, and end, complete in meaning and in expression, pure, leading to a holy life, that is to say, the method of mindfulness of the body. You should listen closely and contemplate it well; I will explain it to you."

諸比丘言：「唯然，世尊！願樂欲聞。」
The monks said, "Yes, World-Honored One! We wish to hear and will listen joyfully."

佛告諸比丘：「云何名為身念處法門？所謂內身循身觀，比丘觀已，則不住於魔之境界，能捨煩惱。如實觀身，既得知見證如是法，我說是人涅槃所攝。如是比丘實見身已，不為諸惡之所亂也，能斷眼耳鼻舌身意內染，及外色聲香味觸法，如是循身觀，能到涅槃。如是比丘，眼雖見色，不生分別，不起染欲歡喜之心，如實觀身，此身唯有髮毛爪齒、薄皮脂血、筋肉骨髓、生藏熟藏、黃白痰癊、冷熱風病、大腸小腸、屎尿不淨、肝膽腸胃、脂髓精血、涕唾目淚、頭頂髑髏。如是觀身，隨順係念，若如是念，則不著色聲香味觸外境界也。
The Buddha told the monks, "What is called the method of mindfulness of the body? It is to contemplate the body within the body, observing attentively in such a way that, thereby, the monks live not clinging to anything in the world. Understanding the body as it actually is, if one achieves the knowledge and vision as it really is, I declare that person is included in the embrace of Nirvana. Such a monk, truly seeing the body, is not disturbed by evil, can abandon defilements internal to the eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind, as well as external forms, sounds, odors, flavors, tactile objects, and mental objects. In contemplating the body within the body, one can reach Nirvana. Thus, though the eyes see forms, there arises no differentiation, no arising of desire or joy. Contemplating the body truly, this very body only consists of hair, nails, teeth, skin, flesh, sinews, bones, marrow, kidneys, heart, liver, diaphragm, spleen, lungs, intestines, mesentery, undigested food, feces, bile, phlegm, pus, blood, sweat, fat, tears, grease, saliva, mucus, oil of the joints, and urine. In such contemplation of the body, adhering and abiding in mindfulness, if one contemplates thus, then they are not attached to forms, sounds, odors, flavors, tactile sensations, or mental objects."

「初觀眼色，如實見眼，但是肉摶，四大所成。云何行者如實觀眼？觀於眼根，此肉堅分，內有覺法，是名眼根肉摶內地界也。復觀眼根肉摶之中，內有覺法——目淚濕等，是名眼根肉摶之中內水界也。復觀眼根肉摶之中，內有覺法——有暖、有熱，是名眼根肉摶之中內火界也。復觀眼根肉摶之中，內風輕動，是名眼根肉摶之中內風界也。於內風界如實觀察，耳鼻舌身隨順觀察亦復如是，如是觀已，於可愛色不生樂著，不為愛境之所破壞。
"At first, one contemplates the colors seen by the eye, truly seeing the eye as merely a formation of the four great elements. How does a practitioner truly contemplate the eye? By observing the eye faculty, observing this solid form which internally possesses the faculty of consciousness, this is called the internal earth element within the eye. Further observing within the eye faculty, internal consciousness arises by means of moistness such as tears, which is called the internal water element within the eye. Further observing within the eye faculty, internal consciousness arises with warmth or heat, which is called the internal fire element within the eye. Further observing within the eye faculty, there is light movement of air, which is called the internal wind element within the eye. Observing the internal wind element as it truly is, similarly observing the ear, nose, tongue, body follows likewise. After such observation, no attachment arises towards desirable colors, nor is one destroyed by the realm of desire."

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。如此身者，念念生滅，生老病死，此身如幻，空無所有，無實無堅，如水泡沫，眾苦集處、眾苦所依、眾苦之藏，如是身中無有少樂，一切皆苦、一切無常、一切破壞，衰變之法，磨滅不淨。
"Furthermore, the practitioner observes the body within the body. Such bodies, moment by moment arise and cease, experience birth, aging, sickness, death - this body is like an illusion, empty, void of self, insubstantial, fleeting, like a bubble or froth. A place of many sufferings, a foundation for suffering, a storehouse of suffering. In this body, there is little joy, all is suffering, all is impermanent, all is breaking apart, subject to decay and destruction, grinding away impurity."

「復次，修行者觀身循身觀。如是身者，孰為其本？云何順行？誰為救護？云何而住？是比丘如實觀察，復作是念：『如是身者，以業為本，由業順行，業為能救。若集善業，生天人中。惡業相應，墮於地獄、餓鬼、畜生。如是身者，不淨不堅，無常不住。』如是比丘如實觀身，於愛欲中不復生念。
"Furthermore, the practitioner observes the body within the body. Whence comes this body? How does it function? Who protects it? How does it remain? The monk, observing truly, thinks further: 'This body is based on actions (karma), proceeds in accordance with actions, and is protected by actions. If one gathers wholesome actions, one is reborn among gods or humans. Corresponding to unwholesome actions, one falls into hell, becomes a hungry ghost, or an animal. Such a body, impure, unlasting, impermanent, unsubstantial.' Thus, the monk, truly observing the body, generates no further thoughts of lustful desire."

「復次，修行者如實觀眼。如閻浮提人所有眼根，有虛空處得見色像，餘方所見如是不耶？若諸弟子或聞我所說，或以天眼、智慧觀察：閻浮提人見色之時，有眼、有色、有明、有空無礙、有意念心，五因緣故，而得見色；欝單越人則不如是，設無空處，亦得見色，猶如魚等水中見色，欝單越人於山障外徹見無礙亦復如是。
"Furthermore, the practitioner truly observes the eye. As for the eyes of the people in Jambudvīpa that can see forms in space, is it the same for others as well? If the disciples either hear what I say or use the divine eye or wisdom to observe: When people in Jambudvīpa see forms, there are the eye, the forms, the awareness, the space unobstructed, and the consciousness intent—due to these five conditions, they can see the forms; however, for the people in Uddiyāna, it is not so. Even without space, they can still see forms, just as fish see forms in water, so can the people in Uddiyāna perceive forms beyond mountains and obstacles without impediment."

「復次，修行者隨順觀身。如閻浮提人耳之所聞愛不愛聲，近則了了，遠則不了，大遠不聞；欝單越人則不如是。是比丘如實觀於欝單越人耳之所聞，若近若遠、若大若小、若愛不愛，以報勝故，而皆能聞。譬如日光，近遠麁細、若淨不淨，光明悉照。欝單越人所聞音聲亦復如是。
"Furthermore, the practitioner observes in accordance with the body. People in Jambudvīpa, when they hear sounds they like or dislike, can hear them distinctly when close, vaguely when far, and not at all when very far away; the people of Uddiyāna do not experience this. The monk, truly observing how the people of Uddiyāna hear, regardless of near or far, large or small, liked or disliked sounds due to the excellence of their karma, can hear them all. Just as the sunlight, whether near or far, coarse or fine, clean or unclean, illuminates all uniformly; so it is with what the people of Uddiyāna hear."

「復次，修行者隨順觀身。如閻浮提人鼻根所聞，欝單越人如是不耶？彼以聞慧或以天眼見：欝單越人以報勝故，但聞眾香，不聞臭氣。譬如水乳同置一器，鵝王飲之，但飲乳汁，其水猶存。欝單越人亦復如是，但聞眾香，不聞臭氣。
"Furthermore, the practitioner observes in accord with the body. As for the people in Jambudvīpa and their perception through the nose, is it the same for Uddiyāna people? They, by using the wisdom hearing or divine eye see: People of Uddiyāna, due to the merit of their karma, only smell fragrances and do not smell foul odors. Like water and milk placed together in one vessel, the swan drinks only the milk, leaving the water behind. The people of Uddiyāna are similarly able to only smell fragrances and not foul odors."

「復次，修行者隨順觀身。如閻浮提人舌所得味，欝單越人如是不耶？彼以聞慧或以天眼見：閻浮提人上中下食，欝單越人則不如是。欝單越人無我所心，常自行善，自然粳米，其食一味，閻浮提人則不如是。
"Furthermore, the practitioner observes in accordance with the body. As for the flavors savored by the humans of Jambudvīpa, is it the same for the people of Uḍḍiyāna? Those with wisdom hearing or with the divine eye see: People of Jambudvīpa consume foods of various qualities, whereas the people of Uḍḍiyāna do not do so. The people of Uḍḍiyāna, without the notion of self, constantly engage in wholesome actions, naturally subsisting on pristine rice, consuming a singular taste, unlike the people of Jambudvīpa."

「復次，修行者隨順觀身。如閻浮提人種種色身，欝單越人如是不耶？彼以聞慧或以天眼觀：閻浮提人種種色身，欝單越人則不如是，以善業故，純一色身，道等、身等，其色猶如閻浮檀金，其身圓直柔軟端正，其報不比閻浮提人。閻浮提人無量種業，其行不同，是故則有無量種身、無量種色。
"Furthermore, the practitioner observes in accordance with the body. As for the various physical appearances of the people in Jambudvīpa, do the people of Uḍḍiyāna look the same? They, through wisdom hearing or with the divine eye observe: People of Jambudvīpa have various physical forms, but the people of Uḍḍiyāna are not so because of their good karma, they have uniform physical forms, equal in the way and in body, their complexion is like refined gold, their bodies are round, straight, soft, and proper in posture, their retribution is not comparable to the people of Jambudvīpa. The people of Jambudvīpa, due to their countless different karmas, engage in various actions, and hence there are countless different bodies, countless different physical forms."

「如是比丘於二天下人世界中隨順觀已，次觀第三弗婆提國。如閻浮提人、欝單越人所有諸入，與弗婆提人諸入所見，為同不耶？彼以聞慧或以天眼見：弗婆提人於黑闇中亦見眾色，如閻浮提中猫虎兕馬、角鵄之屬，無光明處能見眾色；弗婆提人亦復如是，於夜闇中如眼境界，能見一切麁細眾色。
"Furthermore, after observing in accord with the body, having observed the peoples of the two human world realms, the monk next examines the country of Utpala. As with the people of Jambudvīpa and Uḍḍiyāna in terms of all their sense bases, are the people of Utpala similar in what they perceive through their sense bases? They, through wisdom hearing or with the divine eye see: People of Utpala can also see various colors in darkness, just as the creatures of Jambudvīpa such as cats, tigers, rhinos, and horses, and kinds of birds, can see various colors in places without light; the people of Utpala are likewise, able to see all coarse and fine colors in the night as if in the realm of sight, perceiving everything unobstructedly."

「復次，修行者隨順觀身，云何觀於閻浮提人？如前所說，如閻浮提人所聞之音，弗婆提人如是不耶？彼以聞慧或以天眼見：弗婆提人聞怖畏聲，耳識所緣，盡一箭道，以福德故，不聞遠處怖畏之聲。
"Furthermore, the practitioner observes in accordance with the body, how does one observe the people of Jambudvīpa? As previously stated, do the people of Utpala hear in the way the people of Jambudvīpa do? They, through the wisdom hearing or with the divine eye see: People of Utpala, when they hear frightening sounds, the objects of ear-consciousness, are heard up to a bow-shot distance due to their meritorious virtue, they do not hear terrifying sounds from afar."

「復次，修行者隨順觀身已，觀三天下眾生住處。如閻浮提人、欝單越人鼻識所緣，弗婆提人如是不耶？彼以聞慧或以天眼見：弗婆提人晝所聞香，鼻識嗅已，夜亦如是，以報勝故。
"Furthermore, having observed the body in accordance with the body, the practitioner observes the dwellings of beings in the three worlds. As for the sense of smell experienced by the people of Jambudvīpa and Uḍḍiyāna, do the Utpala people experience it in the same way? They, through the wisdom hearing or with the divine eye see: People of Utpala, due to the superiority of their karma, smell only fragrances during the day, and their sense of smell functions the same at night."

「復次，修行者隨順觀身。如閻浮提人、欝單越人舌識知味，如是弗婆提人所得之味如是不耶？彼以聞慧或以天眼見：弗婆提人一食賒盧迦，三日不飢。弗婆提人乃至命終，身無病惱，以法勝故；若臨命終遇病五日，爾乃命終。
"Furthermore, the practitioner observes in accordance with the body. How do the people of Utpala, regarding the tastes they obtain, compare with the people of Jambudvīpa and Uḍḍiyāna? They, through the wisdom hearing or with the divine eye see: People of Utpala, after eating a meal of śāluka, do not feel hunger for three days. Until the end of their lives, the people of Utpala suffer no illness due to their virtuous karma; if they are to fall ill at death, they suffer for five days before passing away."

「復次，修行者隨順觀身。如閻浮提人、欝單越人身之形相，弗婆提人如是不耶？彼以聞慧或以天眼見：弗婆提人其身圓滿如尼俱陀樹。
"Furthermore, the practitioner observes in accordance with the body. As for the physical appearance of the people in Jambudvīpa and Uḍḍiyāna, are the people of Utpala the same? They, through wisdom hearing or with the divine eye see: The bodies of the people of Utpala are full and round like the Nyagrodha tree."

「復次，修行者隨順觀身，於三天下如實觀已，觀於第四瞿陀尼人所住之處。云何瞿陀尼人緣身境界？彼以聞慧或以天眼見：瞿陀尼人眼識所緣山壁無礙，如於頗梨琉璃之中見眾色像，瞿陀尼人亦復如是。
"Furthermore, the practitioner observes in accordance with the body, having truly observed the three worlds, he observes the dwelling place of the people of Kauṇḍinya. How do the people of Kauṇḍinya engage with the material world through their bodies? They, through wisdom hearing or with the divine eye see: people of Kauṇḍinya, like seeing various colors through crystal in the presence of walls and barriers, their eye-consciousness perceives colors unobstructed, likewise, even in darkness, they perceive all coarse and fine colors as if in the realm of sight, perceiving everything unobstructedly."

「復次，修行者隨順觀身。如閻浮提中、欝單越中、弗婆提中，三天下人聞聲差別，瞿陀尼人耳識緣聲，如是不耶？彼以聞慧或以天眼見：瞿陀尼人眼識聞聲，如閻浮提中蛇虺之類眼中聞聲，瞿陀尼人亦復如是，如隔障礙，聞眾音聲、見眾色像亦復如是，以法勝故。
"Furthermore, the practitioner observes in accordance with the body. As for the people of Jambudvīpa, Uḍḍiyāna, and Utpala, do the differences in the sounds they hear apply to the people of Kauṇḍinya as well? They, through wisdom hearing or with the divine eye see: The people of Kauṇḍinya, when they perceive sounds, like the snakes of Jambudvīpa that hear through their eyes, can perceive sounds in this manner as well. Despite barriers, they hear various sounds and see various forms just as well, by virtue of their Dharma practice."

「復次，修行者隨順觀身。如閻浮提人、弗婆提人鼻識緣香，瞿陀尼人如是不耶？瞿陀尼人嗅香法異，眼等別緣。云何瞿陀尼人鼻識緣香？彼以聞慧或以天眼見：瞿陀尼人若眼見色，即亦知香，若眼不見亦聞其香，以法勝故。
"Furthermore, the practitioner observes in accordance with the body. As for the Utpala people's perception through the nose, do the people of Kauṇḍinya experience it in the same way? The people of Kauṇḍinya have a different way of perceiving fragrance, with distinct conditions. How do the people of Kauṇḍinya engage with scent through the nose? They, through the wisdom hearing or with the divine eye see: People of Kauṇḍinya, if they see colors, they also know fragrances; if they do not see, they also smell the fragrance, due to the superiority of their Dharma practice."

「復次，修行者隨順觀身。云何瞿陀尼人舌識緣味？彼以聞慧或以天眼見：瞿陀尼人食於稗子、飲於牛味，如閻浮提人飲苷𧀹酒、蒲桃之酒，瞿陀尼人飲牛五味，能令惽醉亦復如是。瞿陀尼人食於稗子，如閻浮提人食粳糧飯，充足飽滿。
"Furthermore, the practitioner observes in accordance with the body. How do the people of Kauṇḍinya perceive taste through the tongue? They, through wisdom hearing or with the divine eye see: People of Kauṇḍinya, by consuming barley and tasting the flavor of beef, as people in Jambudvīpa consume Sura and Pūtana wines, the people of Kauṇḍinya consuming the five flavors of cow can also become intoxicated. The people of Kauṇḍinya, by eating barley, just as people in Jambudvīpa consume refined grain rice, are fully sated."

「復次，修行者隨順觀身。云何觀於瞿陀尼人身之量耶？彼以聞慧或以天眼見：瞿陀尼人其身長短——半多羅樹，如業相似，自業色身。
"Furthermore, the practitioner observes in accordance with the body. How does one observe the stature of the people of Kauṇḍinya? They, through wisdom hearing or with the divine eye see: The stature of Kauṇḍinya people, whether tall or short, is like the Tambala tree, similar to their karma, a body colored by their actions."

「復次，修行者思惟觀察四天下中何等住處，性等相似、意等相似、行等相似？互對觀察。彼以聞慧或以天眼見：四天下眾生心意，無有一人心意相似，無有一人行等相似，無有一人身等相似，一切無有一人相似。是名比丘隨順觀身。
"Furthermore, practitioners observe in accordance with the body. Among the beings of the four directions, what kind of dwellings do they have, what natures are similar, what intentions are similar, what actions are similar? They observe in comparison. They, either through the wisdom hearing or with the divine eye, see: in the four directions, the minds and intentions of beings, not a single person’s mind and intention are identical, not a single person's actions are identical, not a single person's body is identical, in all, not a single person is identical. This is called a monk observing the body in accordance."

「復次，修行者隨順觀身。云何四天下人頗有一人無業無因來生不耶？無業藏耶？無業流轉耶？頗有不行習欲法耶？如是比丘不見一人無業藏者，無有一人無業而生，無有一人無業流轉，無有一人不習欲法，隨所作業，或善或不善，隨業受報，無有一人不為怨親中人所攝。是名修行者隨順觀身。
"Furthermore, practitioners observe in accordance with the body. Is there any person among the beings of the four directions who is born without karma, without cause? Is there a storehouse of non-action? Is there transmigration without action? Is there anyone who does not engage in the practice of desiring sensual pleasures? Such a monk sees not a single person without a storehouse of karma, not a single person is born without karma, not a single person transmigrates without karma, not a single person refrains from practicing the law of sensual desires. Depending on their actions, whether good or bad, they receive their retribution accordingly. There is not a single person who is not seized by those among enemies and relatives. This is called a practitioner observing in accordance with the body."

「復次，隨順觀身。云何集業而得天身？云何天中受五欲樂？彼以聞慧或以天眼觀：諸眾生生四天王天處，受天五欲，眼視美色，不知厭足，或細或麁，自以天眼見萬由旬，若化神通，能見無量百千由旬。如是修行者觀天無量善業勢力，四天王天所見色貌皆悉可愛，心生愛樂，不見惡色。
"Furthermore, practitioners observe in accordance with the body. How do beings accumulate actions to attain heavenly bodies? How do they experience the pleasures of the five desires in heaven? They, either through the wisdom hearing or with the divine eye, observe: all sentient beings born in the realm of the Four Heavenly Kings experience the five heavenly desires, look upon beautiful forms without knowing satiation, whether subtle or coarse, and with the divine eye see for thousands of leagues, as if by transformational powers, able to see for limitless hundreds of thousands of leagues. In this way, practitioners observe the boundless good deeds' power in heaven, where all forms seen in the realm of the Four Heavenly Kings are entirely lovable, giving rise to joy and love, without perceiving any unpleasant forms."

「復次，修行者隨順觀身。云何四天王天耳聞音聲？彼以聞慧或以天眼見：四天王天若聞天聲，甚可愛樂，若以報耳聞三千由旬，若化神通，則能聞於二萬由旬，所聞音聲皆可愛樂。
"Furthermore, practitioners observe in accordance with the body. How do the Four Great Kings' heavens perceive sounds? They, either through wisdom hearing or with the divine eye, see: Whenever sound is heard in the heavens of the Four Great Kings, it is extremely delightful. If heard with the normal ear within three thousand leagues, and with transformational powers, then can be heard up to twenty thousand leagues, all sounds heard are delightful."

「復次，修行者隨順觀身。云何四天王天鼻聞香耶？彼以聞慧或以天眼見：四天王天自報鼻根，聞於眾香二百由旬，若化神通，聞於百千由旬之香。
"Furthermore, the practitioner observes in accordance with the body. How do the Four Great Kings' heavens perceive scents? They, either through wisdom hearing or with the divine eye, see: The heavens of the Four Great Kings, through the merit of their olfactory root, smell a variety of fragrances up to two hundred leagues away, and with transformational powers, they can smell fragrances from a hundred thousand leagues away."

「復次，修行者隨順觀身。云何觀於四天王天舌根充滿？彼以聞慧或以天眼見：四天王天舌根無厭亦無不愛，如業所得，以善業故，於味不厭。
"Furthermore, the practitioner observes in accordance with the body. How does one contemplate that the tongues of the Four Great Kings' heavens are fully satisfied? They, either through wisdom hearing or with the divine eye, see: The heavens of the Four Great Kings, due to their tongues being satiated without disgust and also without disfavor, according to what is obtained by their actions, due to good actions, are not disgusted by flavors."

「復次，修行者隨順觀身。云何觀於諸天身耶，若麁若細、若速疾行？彼以聞慧或以天眼見：諸天身有大勢力，神通微細，於一手中置五百天在手而住，各令諸天身不妨礙，亦不迫隘。譬如一室燃五百燈，其燈光明不相逼迫，諸天手中置五百天亦復如是不迮不妨。
"Furthermore, the practitioner observes in accordance with the body. How do the Four Great Kings' heavens perceive scents? They, either through wisdom hearing or with the divine eye, see: The heavens of the Four Great Kings, through the merit of their olfactory root, smell a variety of fragrances up to two hundred leagues away, and with transformational powers, they can smell fragrances from a hundred thousand leagues away."

「復次，諸天若化大身無量由旬，若好若醜，若有見者或怖不怖。
"Furthermore, practitioners observe in accordance with the body. How do the devas if they were to manifest great bodies immeasurable in leagues, whether pleasant or unpleasant, whether seen as fearsome or not fearsome?"

「復次，修行者隨順觀身。云何觀於速行天耶？彼以聞慧或以天眼見：速行天一眴目頃能行無量百千由旬還至本處，隨天憶念所往之處，無所障礙。若有所欲，皆悉具足，無能奪者，於一切處所得之物皆悉自在，於他無畏，無能為礙，天境界樂念念增長，以善業故，受五欲樂。是名行者隨順觀身。
"Furthermore, the practitioner observes in accordance with the body. How does one observe the swift gods? They, either through wisdom hearing or with the divine eye, see: Swift gods in a single glance can travel immeasurable hundreds of thousands of leagues and return to their original place, going to any place they recall without obstruction. Whatever they desire, they achieve without being deprived; possessing everything freely in all places, without fear from others, without hindrance, their joy in the heavenly realms grows moment by moment. Due to good deeds, they experience the joy of the five desires. This is called the practitioner observing in accordance with the body."

「復次，修行者隨順觀身。云何觀於三十三天身耶？云何緣於境界受樂？彼以聞慧或以天眼觀：三十三天如四天王天受境界樂。三十三天受於愛色聲香味觸，勝四天王天足一千倍。何以故？三十三天所作之業，勝愛大力可愛樂故，勝於四天王天所作業故。以三十三天所作業勝，是故四天王天不及上天，如是三十三天所受樂勝不可具說。是名修行者隨順觀身。
Let's continue translating this scroll of the chinese translation of Saddharma­smṛtyupasthāna from ~540 CE. So,
when you translate or give the meaning/etymology of a word, it should be in the context of a Buddhist translation of a sanskrit text in ~540 CE written into classical chinese of that time.

I'll give you two things:
1. the chinese text to translate
2. the curent translation file for context on prior translations so you can stay consistent.

let's translate the following text:

```
「復次，修行者隨順觀身。云何四天王天鼻聞香耶？彼以聞慧或以天眼見：四天王天自報鼻根，聞於眾香二百由旬，若化神通，聞於百千由旬之香。
```

**Only** translate the line given, the file is for context only. No explanation, just the translation text in english.
"Furthermore, the practitioner observes in accordance with the body. How do the Four Great Kings' heavens perceive scents? They, either through wisdom hearing or with the divine eye, see: The heavens of the Four Great Kings, through the merit of their olfactory root, smell a variety of fragrances up to two hundred leagues away, and with transformational powers, they can smell fragrances from a hundred thousand leagues away."
「復次，修行者隨順觀身。云何觀於四天王天舌根充滿？彼以聞慧或以天眼見：四天王天舌根無厭亦無不愛，如業所得，以善業故，於味不厭。

"Furthermore, the practitioner observes in accordance with the body. How does one contemplate that the tongues of the Four Great Kings' heavens are fully satisfied? They, either through wisdom hearing or with the divine eye, see: The heavens of the Four Great Kings, due to their tongues being satiated without disgust and also without disfavor, according to what is obtained by their actions, due to good actions, are not disgusted by flavors."
「復次，修行者隨順觀身。云何觀於諸天身耶，若麁若細、若速疾行？彼以聞慧或以天眼見：諸天身有大勢力，神通微細，於一手中置五百天在手而住，各令諸天身不妨礙，亦不迫隘。譬如一室燃五百燈，其燈光明不相逼迫，諸天手中置五百天亦復如是不迮不妨。

"Furthermore, the practitioner observes in accordance with the body. How do the Four Great Kings' heavens perceive scents? They, either through wisdom hearing or with the divine eye, see: The heavens of the Four Great Kings, through the merit of their olfactory root, smell a variety of fragrances up to two hundred leagues away, and with transformational powers, they can smell fragrances from a hundred thousand leagues away."
「復次，諸天若化大身無量由旬，若好若醜，若有見者或怖不怖。

"Furthermore, practitioners observe in accordance with the body. How do the devas if they were to manifest great bodies immeasurable in leagues, whether pleasant or unpleasant, whether seen as fearsome or not fearsome?"
「復次，修行者隨順觀身。云何觀於速行天耶？彼以聞慧或以天眼見：速行天一眴目頃能行無量百千由旬還至本處，隨天憶念所往之處，無所障礙。若有所欲，皆悉具足，無能奪者，於一切處所得之物皆悉自在，於他無畏，無能為礙，天境界樂念念增長，以善業故，受五欲樂。是名行者隨順觀身。

"Furthermore, the practitioner observes in accordance with the body. How does one observe the swift gods? They, either through wisdom hearing or with the divine eye, see: Swift gods in a single glance can travel immeasurable hundreds of thousands of leagues and return to their original place, going to any place they recall without obstruction. Whatever they desire, they achieve without being deprived; possessing everything freely in all places, without fear from others, without hindrance, their joy in the heavenly realms grows moment by moment. Due to good deeds, they experience the joy of the five desires. This is called the practitioner observing in accordance with the body."
「復次，修行者隨順觀身。云何觀於三十三天身耶？云何緣於境界受樂？彼以聞慧或以天眼觀：三十三天如四天王天受境界樂。三十三天受於愛色聲香味觸，勝四天王天足一千倍。何以故？三十三天所作之業，勝愛大力可愛樂故，勝於四天王天所作業故。以三十三天所作業勝，是故四天王天不及上天，如是三十三天所受樂勝不可具說。是名修行者隨順觀身。

"Furthermore, the practitioner observes in accordance with the body. How do beings in the Thirty-Three Heavens perceive their bodies? And how do they experience joy in their realms? They, either through wisdom hearing or with the divine eye, observe: The beings in the Thirty-Three Heavens experience joy in their realms just like the Four Great Kings. The beings in the Thirty-Three Heavens experience joy from desirable forms, sounds, odors, flavors, and touches, a thousand times more than the beings of the Four Great Kings' Heavens. Why is this so? Because the actions performed by the beings in the Thirty-Three Heavens are of greater love, great strength, and desirable joy, surpassing those of the Four Great Kings' Heavens. Since the actions performed by the beings in the Thirty-Three Heavens are superior, therefore the Four Great Kings’ Heavens do not compare to the higher heavens, and thus the joy experienced by the beings in the Thirty-Three Heavens is unsurpassably supreme. This is called the practitioner observing in accordance with the body."

「復次，修行者隨順觀身。云何觀於地獄？地獄眾生所受之身，謂活地獄、黑繩地獄、大合地獄、叫喚地獄、大叫喚地獄、焦熱地獄、大焦熱地獄、阿鼻地獄。彼以聞慧或以天眼見：諸眾生所作之業——不可愛業、不喜樂業、不善之業，謂三種業，於身口意造集業故，墮地獄中。集惡業故，受地獄苦，於地獄中受諸劇苦，乃至惡業不盡終不得脫。是名修行者隨順身觀。
"Furthermore, the practitioner observes in accordance with the body. How do the Four Great Kings' heavens perceive scents? They, either through wisdom hearing or with the divine eye, see: The heavens of the Four Great Kings, through the merit of their olfactory root, smell a variety of fragrances up to two hundred leagues away, and with transformational powers, they can smell fragrances from a hundred thousand leagues away."

「復次，修行者作是思惟：『作何等業墮於地獄？』彼以聞慧或以天眼見：此眾生習近殺害，樂習增長，以是因緣，墮活地獄。又見眾生習近殺生偷盜，喜樂習近，增長斯惡，以此因緣，墮黑繩地獄。又見眾生習近殺生偷盜邪婬，習近喜樂，增長斯惡，以是因緣，墮眾合地獄。又見眾生習近殺生偷盜、邪婬妄語，習近喜樂，增長斯惡，以是因緣，墮叫喚地獄。又見眾生殺生偷盜、邪婬妄語、勸人飲酒，以是因緣，墮大叫喚地獄。又見眾生殺生偷盜、邪婬妄語、飲酒、邪見，以是因緣，墮焦熱地獄。又見眾生殺生偷盜、邪婬妄語、以酒飲人、邪見不信，或破比丘、比丘尼戒，以是因緣，墮大焦熱地獄。又見眾生作五逆業五種惡業，以是因緣，墮阿鼻地獄。云何五逆？若有眾生殺父、殺母、殺阿羅漢、破和合僧、若以惡心出佛身血，如是五種大惡業故，墮阿鼻地獄。思惟如是地獄業報，於諸眾生起悲愍心。
"Furthermore, the practitioner contemplates, pondering: 'What kinds of actions lead to falling into hell?' By wisdom hearing or with the divine eye, they see: This sentient being habitually inclined towards killing, takes pleasure in the habit, nurturing it, and for these reasons, falls into the active hells. Also seen are sentient beings accustomed to killing, stealing, delighting in these acts, nurturing such evils, for these reasons, they fall into the black rope hell. Furthermore, observing sentient beings accustomed to killing, stealing, and lasciviousness, taking pleasure and nurturing these evils, for these reasons, they fall into the crushing hell. Also observed are sentient beings inclined towards killing, stealing, lascivious acts, and false speech, delighting and nurturing these evils, for these reasons, they fall into the screaming hell. Also seen are beings killing, stealing, engaging in sexual misconduct, false speech, inciting others to consume alcohol, for these reasons, they fall into the great screaming hell. Further observed are beings engaging in killing, stealing, sexual misconduct, false speech, consuming alcohol, holding wrong views, for these reasons, they fall into the burning hells. Further seen are beings killing, stealing, engaging in sexual misconduct, false speech, consuming alcohol, holding wrong views and disbelief, or breaking the precepts of monks and nuns, for these reasons, they fall into the great burning hells. Also seen are beings committing the five heinous actions and five types of evil deeds, for these reasons, they fall into Avīci hell. What are the five heinous actions? If any sentient being kills their father, kills their mother, kills an arhat, causes schism in the sangha, or maliciously draws blood from the Buddha, because of such grave evils, they fall into Avīci hell. Contemplating such infernal retributions, they cultivate compassion towards all sentient beings."

「復次，修行者隨順觀身。云何眾生墮餓鬼道？彼以聞慧或以天眼見：無量餓鬼以慳嫉故，墮餓鬼中，在於地下五百由旬。無量餓鬼惡食、無食或食不淨，互相食噉，飢渴所逼，受大苦惱，上雨大火以燒其身。此諸餓鬼隨惡業故，受如是苦。
"Furthermore, the practitioner in accordance contemplates the body. How do beings fall into the realm of hungry ghosts? Through wisdom hearing or with the divine eye, they see: Countless hungry ghosts fall into their realm due to their greed and envy, existing beneath the earth five hundred yojanas deep. Countless hungry ghosts suffer from vile food, no food, or impure food, devouring each other. Pressed by hunger and thirst, they endure great torment, and rains of fire burn their bodies. These hungry ghosts, due to such evil karma, suffer in these ways."

「復次，修行者隨順觀身。彼以聞慧或以天眼見畜生道，彼見無量種種畜生，略說三處：一者水行，所謂魚等；二者陸行，所謂象馬牛羊、麞鹿猪等；三者空行，所謂無量眾飛鳥等。
"Furthermore, the practitioner observes in accordance with the body. They, through wisdom hearing or seeing with the divine eye, see various animals, briefly described in three categories: First are those that move in water, such as fish, etc.; second are those that move on land, such as elephants, horses, cows, sheep, deer, pigs, etc.; third are those that move in the sky, such as countless kinds of flying birds, etc."

「復次，修行者隨順觀身。彼以聞慧或以天眼觀於畜生有幾種生？彼以聞慧或以天眼見：諸畜生有四種生。何等為四？一者胎生，所謂象馬水牛、牛羊之類；二者卵生，所謂蛇蚖鵝鴨、鷄雉種種眾鳥；三者濕生，蚤虱蚊子之類；四者化生，如長面龍等。是修行者如實觀畜生已，若天若人、若地獄餓鬼畜生，不見一處不為恩愛別離所惱，一切眾生輪轉生死，或作怨家或為親友，無有一處不生不滅。如是比丘於生死處不生愛心，如是心不喜樂，如是厭離不隨，如是破壞，如是滅法，不可久住一切眾生眾苦之處。是故比丘生死之中多苦少味、無常破壞，當應厭離，厭離生死便得解脫。
"Furthermore, the practitioner observes in accordance with the body. They, either through wisdom hearing or with the divine eye, observe how many types of births are there among animals? Through wisdom hearing or with the divine eye, they see: There are four types of births among animals. What are the four? The first is womb-born, such as elephants, horses, water buffaloes, cows, and sheep; the second is egg-born, such as snakes, turtles, geese, ducks, chickens, pheasants, and various birds; the third is moisture-born, such as fleas, lice, and mosquitoes; the fourth is metamorphosis-born, such as certain types of dragons. Having observed animals in this way, the practitioner sees that whether in heaven, among humans, in hell, or as hungry ghosts or animals, there is nowhere free from the torment of love and separation. All beings cycle through birth and death, becoming enemies or friends to each other, with no place free from arising and ceasing. Such a monk, therefore, does not generate attachment towards the realms of birth and death, his mind does not delight in them, he does not follow them, he destroys them, he extinguishes the dharmas, and should not stay long in any place of suffering for all beings. Therefore, a monk, amidst the suffering and fleeting nature within the cycle of birth and death, should develop detachment, for detachment leads to liberation."

「如是那羅帝婆羅門聚落比丘修行者，內身循身觀，觀於內身——於此身中分分不淨。如實見身，念念思惟，從頭至足循身觀察。是修行者初觀頭頂，彼以聞慧或以天眼觀：頭髑髏以為四分，於頭骨內自有蟲行，名曰腦行，遊行骨內，生於腦中，或行或住，常食此腦。於髑髏中復有諸蟲住髑髏中，若行若食，還食髑髏。復有髮蟲住於骨外，食於毛根，以蟲瞋故，令髮墮落。復有耳蟲住在耳中，食耳中肉，以蟲瞋故，令人耳痛或令耳聾。復有鼻蟲住在鼻中，食鼻中肉，以蟲瞋故，能令其人飲食不美；腦涎流下，蟲食腦涎，是故令人飲食不美。復有脂蟲生在脂中，住於脂中，常食人脂，以蟲瞋故，令人頭痛。復有續蟲生於節間，有名身蟲住在交牙，以蟲瞋故，令人脈痛猶如針刺。復有諸蟲名曰食涎，住舌根中，以蟲瞋故，令人口燥。復有諸蟲名牙根蟲，住於牙根，以蟲瞋故，令人牙疼。是名內修行者循身身觀，是十種蟲，住於頭中。
"Thus, the Nalanda Brahmin settlement monks who were practitioners observed their internal bodies. They practiced observing the internal part of the body, seeing impurity in every part of this body. Truly seeing the body, contemplating thought after thought, observing the body from head to foot. These practitioners first observed the crown of the head, they, through wisdom hearing or by the divine eye, saw: Dividing the cranium into four parts, within the cranial bones themselves there are worms named brain worms, moving inside the bones, living within the brain, sometimes moving, sometimes staying still, always eating this brain. Inside the cranium, there are also various worms residing, moving and eating, then eating the cranium again. Moreover, there are hair worms residing outside the bone, eating at the hair roots, due to the worms' anger, causing the hair to fall out. Furthermore, there are ear worms residing in the ears, consuming the flesh inside the ears, due to the worms' anger, causing ear pain or deafness. Furthermore, there are nose worms residing in the nose, consuming the flesh inside the nose, because of the worms' anger, making one's food and drink tasteless; as brain saliva flows down, worms eat this brain saliva, therefore making one's food and drink tasteless. Furthermore, there are fat worms born within the fat, residing in the fat, always eating human fat, because of the worms' anger, causing headaches. Furthermore, there are joint worms born between the joints, a named bodily worm residing at the crossbones, because of the worms' anger, causing vein pain like needle stabs. Moreover, there are various worms called saliva-eating, residing at the base of the tongue, because of the worms' anger, causing dry mouth. Furthermore, there are various worms named root of the tooth worm, residing at the roots of the teeth, because of the worms' anger, causing toothache. This is called the internal practitioner's observation of the body, these ten kinds of worms, residing in the head."

「復次，修行者觀身循身觀。頭肉中有幾骨耶？彼以聞慧或以天眼見：髑髏骨頭有四分，額骨、頰骨合有三分，鼻骨一分。交牙二骨，頤有一骨，牙齒合有三十二骨，齒根亦爾。咽喉二骨，如是項中有十五骨。
"Furthermore, the practitioner observes the body within the body. How many bones are there within the flesh of the head? They, either through wisdom hearing or with the divine eye, see: The skull has four parts, the frontal bone and cheekbones together are three parts, the nasal bone is one part. The intersecting teeth have two bones, the jaw has one bone, the teeth altogether have thirty-two bones, and so do the roots of the teeth. The throat bones are two, likewise, there are fifteen bones in the neck."

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。云何頭肉以食增長，和合有覺？彼以聞慧或以天眼觀：於頭肉則有四分，兩頰二分，咽喉及舌肉段一分，上下兩脣及其兩耳皮肉四分。其舌根者，名為脈肉，貪嗜上饍，樂於六味。
"Furthermore, the practitioner observes the body within the body. How many bones are there within the flesh of the head? They, either through wisdom hearing or with the divine eye, see: The skull has four parts, the frontal bone and cheekbones together are three parts, the nasal bone is one part. The intersecting teeth have two bones, the jaw has one bone, the teeth altogether have thirty-two bones, and so do the roots of the teeth. The throat bones are two, likewise, there are fifteen bones in the neck."

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。有何等蟲？住在何處？作何等業，或病或安？彼以聞慧或以天眼：初觀咽喉，咽喉有蟲，名曰食涎，咀嚼食時，猶如嘔吐，唌唾和雜，欲咽之時，與腦涎合，喉中涎蟲共食此食，以自活命。若蟲增長，令人瘶病。若多食膩或多食甜，或食重食或食醋食，或食冷食，蟲則增長，令人咽喉生於疾病。觀涎蟲已，如實知身。
"Furthermore, the practitioner observes inside the body, inspecting the body within the body. What kind of worms are there? Where do they reside? What actions do they perform, whether causing illness or ease? Through the wisdom hearing or with the divine eye: First observing the throat, there are worms in the throat, named salivary worms, during the chewing of food, it's as if vomiting, with spittle mixed in. When wishing to swallow, it mixes with the brain saliva. In the throat, salivary worms together consume this food, sustaining their own lives. If the worms grow, it causes people to become sick. If one eats too much greasy or sweet food, or heavy and sour food, or cold food, the worms then grow, causing diseases in the throat of people.  Having observed the saliva worms, one truly knows the body."

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。觀於唾蟲能消諸唾，或能為病或令安隱。彼以聞慧或以天眼見：消唾蟲住咽喉中，若人不食如上膩等，蟲則安隱，能消於唾，於十脈中流出美味，安隱受樂。若人多唾，蟲則得病，以蟲病故，則吐冷沫，吐冷沫故，胸中成病。觀唾蟲已，如實知身。
"Furthermore, the practitioner observes inside the body, inspecting the body within the body. Observing the spittle worms that dissolve all spittle, capable of causing disease or making hidden. Through the wisdom hearing or with the divine eye, they see: The spittle-dissolving worms reside in the throat, if a person does not eat greasy food, etc., the worms remain hidden, capable of dissolving the spittle. In the ten vessels, delicious flavors flow out, hidden, experiencing pleasure. If a person spits frequently, the worms then become sick; because of the worms' illness, they then vomit frothy spittle, because of the frothy spittle, illness develops in the chest. Having observed the spittle worms, one truly knows the body."

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。觀於吐蟲，云何令人安隱疾病？住在何處？食何等食？彼以聞慧或以天眼：見於吐蟲住人身中，住於十脈流注之處。若人食時，如是之蟲從十脈中，踊身上行至咽喉中，即令人吐，令人生於五種嘔吐。何等為五？一者風吐；二者陰吐；三者唾吐；四者雜吐；五者蠅吐。若蟲安隱，食則調順，入於腹中。
"Furthermore, the practitioner observes inside the body, inspecting the body within the body. Observing the spittle worms that dissolve all spittle, capable of causing disease or making hidden. Through the wisdom hearing or with the divine eye, they see: The spittle-dissolving worms reside in the throat, if a person does not eat greasy food, etc., the worms remain hidden, capable of dissolving the spittle. In the ten vessels, delicious flavors flow out, hidden, experiencing pleasure. If a person spits frequently, the worms then become sick; because of the worms' illness, they then vomit frothy spittle, because of the frothy spittle, illness develops in the chest. Having observed the spittle worms, one truly knows the body."

「云何吐蟲生於風吐？彼以聞慧或以天眼見：食輕冷，若無膩食，則發風病，令人大小便利難通，眼不能睡。風入咽喉，風動吐蟲，以此過故，是名風吐。觀吐蟲已，如實知身。
"How do the worms cause vomiting due to wind? They, either through wisdom hearing or seeing with the divine eye, see: Consuming light and cold food, or devoid of greasy food, then induces the disease of wind, making it difficult for one to pass urine or stools, unable to sleep. The wind enters the throat, stirs the vomiting worms, by this excessive condition, it is termed vomiting due to wind. Having observed the vomiting worms, one truly knows the body."

「復次，修行者觀內身循身觀。云何吐蟲令人吐陰？彼以聞慧或以天眼見：人食辛，醎熱和合，令人發熱，惱於吐蟲，從其住處動而上行，令人吐陰。觀吐蟲已，如實知身。
"Furthermore, the practitioner observes the body within the body. How do the worms cause vomiting due to the bitterness? They, through wisdom hearing or seeing with the divine eye, see: When humans consume bitter foods, the combination of the pungent taste and heat interacts, causing fever in people, troubling the vomiting worms. From their dwelling, they move upward, inducing people to vomit bile. Having observed the vomiting worms, one truly knows the body."

「復次，修行者觀內身循身觀。云何吐蟲令人吐唾？彼以聞慧或以天眼見：人食於甜冷重食、膩滑之食，或食已睡眠，令唾增長，唾增長故，唾蟲增長，為咽喉病，令身沈重，則有冷唾。觀吐蟲已，如實知身。
"Furthermore, the practitioner observes the body within the body. How do the worms cause people to vomit saliva? They, through wisdom hearing or seeing with the divine eye, see: People consuming sweet, cold, heavy, or greasy and slippery foods, or eating and then sleeping, causes an increase in saliva. Because of the increase in saliva, the saliva worms grow, lead to throat diseases, make the body feel heavy, resulting in cold saliva. Having observed the vomiting worms, one truly knows the body."

「復次，修行者觀內身循身觀。云何吐蟲生於雜吐？彼以聞慧或以天眼見：食輕冷無膩之食、辛酢醎食、滑冷重膩，能令吐蟲行咽喉中，以是三過，能令人吐。觀吐蟲已，如實知身。
"Furthermore, the practitioner observes the body within the body. How do the vomiting worms cause various forms of vomiting? They, either through wisdom hearing or seeing with the divine eye, see: Consuming light and cold food, without greasiness, spicy, sour, and salty food, and slippery, cold, heavy, greasy food, can make vomiting worms move within the throat. Due to these three faults, they can make a person vomit. Having observed the vomiting worms, one truly knows the body."

「復次，修行者觀內身循身觀。云何蠅吐令人嘔吐？彼以聞慧或以天眼見：蠅食不淨故，蠅入咽喉，令吐蟲動，則便大吐。觀吐蟲已，如實知身。
"Furthermore, the practitioner observes the body within the body. How do the vomiting worms cause people to vomit due to flies? They, through wisdom hearing or seeing with the divine eye, see: Because flies consume impurity, when flies enter the throat, they stimulate the vomiting worms, thereby causing intense vomiting. Having observed the vomiting worms, one truly knows the body."

「復次，修行者觀內身循身觀。彼以聞慧或以天眼見：醉味蟲行於舌端乃至命脈，於其中間或行或住，微細無足。若食美食，蟲則惽醉增長，若食不美，蟲則萎弱。此蟲食時如蜂食花，微細甜味以用作蜜，嗜味蟲食亦復如是。然其所食雖復微細亦得充足，若蟲得味，我亦如是得此食味；若蟲憶食，我亦憶食；若我不食，如是醉蟲則亦病苦，不得安隱。觀醉蟲已，如實知身。
"Furthermore, the practitioner observes inside the body, inspecting the body within the body. They, through wisdom hearing or with the divine eye, see: The intoxication worm moves from the tip of the tongue to the vital channels, roaming or resting in between, so fine as to be legless. Should one eat delicious food, the worm grows intoxicated and proliferates; if the food is unpalatable, the worm weakens. When this worm feeds, it is like a bee eating from a flower, the subtle sweetness serves to make honey; the taste-loving worm feeds similarly. Yet, its food, though subtle, is also sufficient. If the worm tastes, I too taste this flavor; if the worm remembers food, I too remember the food; if I do not eat, thus the intoxicated worm suffers illness, unable to find solace. Having observed the intoxicated worm, one truly knows the body."

「復次，修行者觀內身循身觀。觀放逸蟲，云何此蟲為我病惱或作安隱？彼以聞慧或以天眼見：放逸蟲住於頂上，若至腦門，令人疾病；若至頂上，令人生瘡；若至咽喉，猶如蟻子，滿咽喉中；若住本處，病則不生。是名觀於放逸之蟲。觀放逸蟲已，如實知身。
"Furthermore, the practitioner observes inside the body, inspecting the body within the body. How do the leech-like worms cause sickness or provide comfort? They, through wisdom hearing or with the divine eye, see: The leech-like worms reside on the crown of the head, reaching the forehead causing sickness; when on the top, they cause sores; reaching the throat, they fill it like ants; when staying in their original place, sickness does not arise. This is called observing the leech-like worms. Having observed the leech-like worms, one truly knows the body."

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。觀於貪嗜六味之蟲，云何病惱？云何安隱？彼以聞慧或以天眼見：六味蟲所貪嗜者，我亦貪嗜，隨此味蟲所不嗜者，我亦不便。若得熱病，蟲亦先得如是熱病，以是過故，令於病人所食不美，無有食味。觀味蟲已，如實知身。
"Furthermore, the practitioner observes inside the body, inspecting the body within the body. Observing the worms that crave the six flavors, how do they cause distress? How do they bring comfort? Through wisdom hearing or with the divine eye, they see: Whatever the six-flavor worms crave, I too crave; whatever these flavor worms disdain, I too find disagreeable. If a fever arises, the worms contract such a fever first, due to this cause, the food eaten by the sick lacks flavor, having no taste at all. Having observed the taste worms, one truly knows the body."

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。觀抒氣蟲住於頂下，彼以聞慧或以天眼見：抒氣蟲以瞋恚故，食腦作孔，或咽喉痛或咽喉塞，咽喉風噎，生於死苦。此抒氣蟲共咽喉中一切諸蟲，皆悉撩亂，生諸病惱。此抒氣蟲常為唾覆，其蟲短小，有面有足。觀抒氣蟲已，如實知身。
"Furthermore, the practitioner observes inside the body, inspecting the body within the body. Observing the breath-holding worm that resides below the crown, through wisdom hearing or with the divine eye, they see: the breath-holding worm, due to its anger, eats through the brain creating holes, causing either throat pain or throat obstruction, wind choke in the throat, leading to the agony of death. This breath-holding worm, along with all the worms in the throat, stir up trouble, giving rise to various illnesses. This breath-holding worm is always covered in saliva, the worm is short and small, having a face and legs. Having observed the breath-holding worm, one truly knows the body."

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。彼以聞慧或以天眼見：憎味蟲住於頭下咽喉根中。云何此蟲為我病惱或作安隱？彼見：此蟲憎嫉諸味，唯嗜一味，或嗜甜味，憎於餘味；或嗜酢味，憎於餘味；或嗜辛味，憎於餘味；或嗜醎味，憎於餘味；或嗜苦味，憎於餘味；或嗜醈味，憎於餘味；隨所憎味，我亦憎之，隨蟲所嗜，我亦嗜之。舌端有脈，隨順於味，令舌乾燥。以蟲瞋故，令舌㿇㿇而腫或令咽喉即得瘶病。若不瞋恚，咽喉則無如上諸病。觀憎味蟲已，如實知身。
"Furthermore, the practitioner observes inside the body, inspecting the body within the body. They, through wisdom hearing or with the divine eye, see: The worm of aversion resides below the head in the root of the throat. How does this worm cause me sickness or comfort? They observed: This worm harbors aversion to all flavors, craving only a particular one; it may crave sweetness and despise other flavors; or crave sourness, despising others; or crave spiciness, despising others; or crave saltiness, despising others; or crave bitterness, despising others; or crave the taste of liquor, despising others. Corresponding to the flavors it despises, I also despise; and according to what the worm craves, I also crave. The tip of the tongue has channels that conform to these tastes, causing the tongue to dry. Because of the worm’s anger, it causes the tongue to feel rough and swollen or causes the throat to suffer from mucus diseases. If not for anger, the throat would not suffer from such diseases. Having observed the aversion-taste worm, one truly knows the body."

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。見：嗜睡蟲其形微細，狀如牖塵，住一切脈，流行趣味，住骨髓內，或住肉內或髑髏內，或在頰內或齒骨內或咽骨中，或在耳中或在眼中，或在鼻中或在鬚髮。此嗜睡蟲風吹流轉，若此蟲病，若蟲疲極，住於心中。心如蓮花，晝則開張，無日光故，夜則還合，心亦如是。蟲住其中，多取境界，諸根疲極，蟲則睡眠，蟲睡眠故，人亦睡眠。一切眾生悉有睡眠，若此睡蟲晝日疲極，人亦睡眠。觀睡蟲已，如實知身。
"Furthermore, the practitioner observes inside the body. They see: the sleep-addicted worms, tiny in form, similar to dust on window panes, residing in all channels, flowing towards flavors, dwelling inside bones and marrow, inside flesh or cranium, inside cheeks or in the jawbone or throat bones, inside ears or eyes, inside noses or in facial hair. These sleep-addicted worms, carried by the wind, when sick or extremely fatigued, reside in the heart. The heart, like a lotus, opens during the day, and due to the lack of sunlight, closes at night; the heart too does this. Worms residing within it seek many sensations; when all faculties are exhausted, the worms sleep, and because the worms sleep, the person also sleeps. All sentient beings invariably experience sleep; when such sleep-addicted worms are exhausted during the day, the person also sleeps. Having observed the sleep-addicted worms, one truly knows the body."

「復次，修行者內身循身觀，見：有腫蟲行於身中，或住頭中或住項中，行於血中或行脂中，其身微細，隨飲血處則有腫起㿇㿇而疼。或在面上或在項上，或在咽喉或在腦門，或在餘處，所在之處能令生腫，若住筋中則無病苦。觀腫蟲已，如實知身。
"Furthermore, the practitioner observes inside the body. They see: the sleep-addicted worms, tiny in form, similar to dust on window panes, residing in all channels, flowing towards flavors, dwelling inside bones and marrow, inside flesh or cranium, inside cheeks or in the jawbone or throat bones, inside ears or eyes, inside noses or in facial hair. These sleep-addicted worms, carried by the wind, when sick or extremely fatigued, reside in the heart. The heart, like a lotus, opens during the day, and due to the lack of sunlight, closes at night; the heart too does this. Worms residing within it seek many sensations; when all faculties are exhausted, the worms sleep, and because the worms sleep, the person also sleeps. All sentient beings invariably experience sleep; when such sleep-addicted worms are exhausted during the day, the person also sleeps. Having observed the sleep-addicted worms, one truly knows the body."

「如是那羅帝婆羅門長者、聚落比丘修行者觀蟲種類，從於頭中、舌耳腦門、毛孔髮中、皮肉骨血筋脈之中如實觀之，既觀察已，於舌味中生厭離心，於後生處不復愛味，於無量無邊由旬愛縛味海能生厭離。以厭離故，不為食愛之所亂惱，不復親近豪貴長者，離於多欲，於食知足，取得支身。以是義故，不嫉他人得供養利，不樂多言、不樂住寺，不起身慢，不生色慢，不恃衣服而生憍慢，不恃袈裟鉢盂而生憍慢，不恃弟子而生憍慢，不恃聚落而生憍慢，不恃親里而生憍慢，獨一無貪，遠離塵垢，住寂靜處，近於涅槃。若貪嗜美味，沒於味海，為魔所攝，去涅槃遠。是修行者觀諸蟲已，於味厭離，不貪飲食。
Thus, the elder Brahmin of Nalanda and the monks practicing there observed the types of worms, truly observing them within the head, amidst tongue and ears, from brain orifice, within pores and hair, inside skin, flesh, bones, blood, sinews, and veins. After having observed, a sense of detachment arose within them from the taste in their tongues, no longer cherishing flavors thereafter, developing detachment in the limitless, boundless ocean of flavor attachment. Due to detachment, they were not disturbed by the craving for flavors, no longer closely associating with the wealthy and noble, distancing themselves from numerous desires, feeling content with food, and attaining self-support. Therefore, they did not envy others for their sustenance and benefits, took no delight in much talk, did not enjoy residing in monasteries, did not give rise to arrogance of the body, did not develop arrogance due to complexion, did not become haughty owing to clothing, did not grow conceited over robes and bowls, did not base their arrogance on disciples, did not pride themselves on the assembly, did not boast about relatives, being solitary without greed, distancing from defilement, dwelling in tranquility, nearing nirvāṇa. If one craves delicious flavors, immersed in the sea of tastes, they are seized by demons, far away from nirvāṇa. Thus, having observed various worms, they developed a detachment from tastes, not craving for food and drink.

「復次，修行者內身循身觀，如實觀於脊骨。彼以聞慧或以天眼見：其脊有四十五骨，胸十四骨，左右脇肋各十二骨，節亦如是，胞骨亦然。如是分別觀骨節已，復觀從肩至髖幾分肉臠？如是左右各十二臠。作是觀已，如實知身。
"Furthermore, the practitioner observes the body within the body, accurately observing the spine. Through wisdom hearing or by seeing with the divine eye: the spine has forty-five bones, the chest has fourteen bones, each of the left and right ribs has twelve bones, the joints as such, and the embryo bone likewise. After discerning and observing the bone sections like this, they again observe how many slices of flesh are there from the shoulder to the hip? Thus, there are twelve slices on each of the left and right sides. Having made this observation, one truly knows the body."

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。有幾許筋，連綴繫縛？彼以聞慧或以天眼見：左右脇除於皮肉，一百細筋以為纏縛。觀筋纏已，如實知身。
"Furthermore, the practitioner observes inside the body, inspecting the body within the body. How many tendons bind and connect? Through wisdom hearing or seeing with the divine eye: on both sides, excluding the skin and flesh, one hundred fine tendons serve as binding. Having observed the tendons, one truly knows the body."

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。觀於此身從膊至髖有幾許脂？彼以聞慧或以天眼自見己身：以食因緣，脂則增長；以食因緣，令脂損減。極羸瘦人——摩伽陀等，有五兩脂。既觀察已，如實知身。
"Furthermore, the practitioner observes the body within the body. How much fat is there within this body from the shoulder to the hip? Through wisdom hearing or with the divine eye, they see: due to food causes and conditions, fat increases; due to food causes and conditions, it decreases. Even those who are extremely lean—such as Moggallāna—have about five taels of fat. After having observed, they truly understand the body."

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。觀我此身有幾許水？彼以聞慧或以天眼自見：身中有十掬水，從毛孔出，名之為汗。於諸根中，眼則出淚，名為濕界。以食因緣，脂血增長。觀身水已，如實知身。
"Furthermore, the practitioner observes the body within the body. Observing this body: 'How much fluid is there?' They, through wisdom hearing or with the divine eye, see for themselves: 'Inside the body, there are ten handfuls of water, emerging from the pores, known as sweat. Among all the senses, the eyes then produce tears, known as the moist realm. Due to the causes and conditions of food, the flesh and blood grow. Having observed the body's fluids, one truly understands the body."

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。觀其身中幾許糞穢？彼以聞慧或以天眼見：其身中有七掬屎，有六掬唾。作此觀已，如實知身。
"Furthermore, the practitioner observes inside the body, inspecting the body within the body. Observing within the body, how much feces and filth are there? They, either through wisdom hearing or with the divine eye, see: Inside the body, there are seven handfuls of feces, and six handfuls of saliva. After having observed this, they truly understand the body."

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。觀我身中幾許痰癊及尿？彼以聞慧或以天眼見：其身中五掬黃癊，尿有四掬，除其病時，或增或減。如是觀已，如實知身。
"Furthermore, the practitioner observes the body within the body. Observing within my body, how much phlegm and urine are there? They, through wisdom hearing or with the divine eye, see: Within their body are five handfuls of yellow phlegm and four handfuls of urine, which may increase or decrease excluding when sick. Having thus observed, they truly understand the body."

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。觀我身中幾許脂髓、不淨穢精？彼以聞慧或以天眼見：其身中十二掬脂，髓有一掬，精有一掬。如是觀已，如實知身。
"Furthermore, the practitioner observes the body within the body. Observing inside my body, how much marrow and unclean seminal essence are there? They, through wisdom hearing or with the divine eye, see: Within their body are twelve handfuls of fat, one handful of marrow, and one handful of seminal essence. Having thus observed, they truly understand the body."

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。觀其身中有幾許風？彼以聞慧或以天眼見：身空處有三掬風。如是觀已，如實知身。
"Furthermore, the practitioner observes the body within the body. Observing within the body, how much wind is there? They, through wisdom hearing or with the divine eye, see: In the empty spaces of the body, there are three handfuls of wind. Having thus observed, they truly understand the body."

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。觀其身中幾脈常流，飲食消化？彼以聞慧或以天眼見：其身中有十三脈，若脈流注，令身肥悅。譬如𣚃槹汲水流注溉灌，令其增長，身脈溉灌亦復如是。何等十三？一名命流脈；二名隨順流脈；三名水流脈；四名汗流脈；五名尿流脈；六名糞流脈；七名十流脈；八名汁流脈；九名肉流脈；十名脂流脈；十一名骨流脈；十二名髓流脈；十三名精流脈。觀流脈已，如實知身。
"Furthermore, the practitioner observes the body within the body. Observing within their body how many vessels are constantly flowing, digesting food and drink? They, through wisdom hearing or seeing with the divine eye, see: Within the body, there are thirteen vessels that, as the vessels flow, make the body feel satisfied and pleased. Just as drawing water to irrigate and moisten promotes growth, so too does the irrigation of the body’s vessels. Which thirteen are these? One is called the life-flow vessel; two is called the following-flow vessel; three is called the water-flow vessel; four is called the sweat-flow vessel; five is called the urine-flow vessel; six is called the feces-flow vessel; seven is called the combined-flow vessel; eight is called the juice-flow vessel; nine is called the flesh-flow vessel; ten is called the fat-flow vessel; eleven is called the bone-flow vessel; twelve is called the marrow-flow vessel; thirteen is called the essence-flow vessel. Having observed the flowing vessels, one truly understands the body."

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。如彼流脈與誰為本，令身肥悅，復有諸蟲處處遍行？彼以聞慧或以天眼見：命流脈，心為其本；隨順流脈，兩脇為本；水流脈者，生藏腭心以為根本；汗流脈者，毛根及脂以為根本；尿流脈者，根胞為本；糞流脈者，熟藏下門為本；十流脈者，咽喉及心以為其本；汁流脈者，肺為其本；肉脂流脈者，筋皮為本；骨流脈者，一切續節為本；髓精流脈者，卵及身根為本。如是行者觀流脈已，如實知身。
"Furthermore, the practitioner observes the body within the body. How does the flow of these vessels originate, nourishing and delighting the body, with various worms roaming everywhere? They, through wisdom hearing or with the divine eye, see: The life-flow vessel originates from the heart; the following-flow vessel’s origin is the two flanks; for the water-flow vessel, the vital organs and palate heart are the base; sweat-flow vessel’s base is the hair roots and fat; the urine-flow vessel’s base is the essential root; the feces-flow vessel originates from the matured organ’s lower gate; the ten-flow vessel is based on the throat and heart; the juice-flow vessel originates from the lungs; the flesh-fat flow vessel’s base is the sinews and skin; the bone-flow vessel’s basis is all the joints; the marrow-essence vessel originates from the eggs and the bodily root. Thus, the practitioner, having observed the flow of vessels, truly knows the body."

「復次，修行者觀身循身觀。有何等蟲何處流行，或為疾病或為安隱，從於髖骨乃至遍身？彼以聞慧或以天眼見：十種蟲至於肝肺，人則得病。何等為十？一名食毛蟲；二名孔穴行蟲；三名禪都摩羅蟲；四名赤蟲；五者食汁蟲；六名毛燈蟲；七名瞋血蟲；八名食血蟲；九名㿇㿇蟲；十名酢蟲。此諸蟲等，其形微細，無足、無目，行於血中，痛痒為相。
"Furthermore, the practitioner observes the body within the body. What kinds of worms roam various places, causing diseases or hidden comfort from the hip bone throughout the body? They, through wisdom hearing or with the divine eye, see: Ten types of worms reach the liver and lungs, causing disease in people. What are the ten? One is named hair-eating worm; two is named hole-dwelling worm; three is named Chan tumora worm; four is named red worm; five is juice-eating worm; six is named hair lamp worm; seven is named angry blood worm; eight is named blood-eating worm; nine is named ulcerous worm; ten is named vinegar worm. These worms, etc., are extremely tiny in form, legless, eyeless, moving within the blood, characterized by their causing of pain and itchiness."

「復次，修行者內身循身觀，觀一一諸蟲在於身中，為何所作？彼以聞慧或以天眼見：食毛蟲若起瞋恚，能噉鬚眉，皆令墮落，令人癩病；若孔行蟲而起瞋恚，行於血中，令身麁澁，頑痺無知；若禪都摩羅蟲流行血中，或在鼻中或在口中，令人口鼻皆悉臭惡；若其赤蟲而起瞋恚，行於血中，能令其人咽喉生瘡；若食汁蟲而起瞋恚，行於血中，令人身體作青痶瘓，或黑或黃痶瘓之病；若毛燈蟲起於瞋恚，血中流行，則生病苦，瘡癬熱黃，疥癩破裂；若瞋血蟲以瞋恚故血中流行，或作赤病，女人赤下，身體搔痒，疥瘡膿爛；若食血蟲瞋而生病腦，頭旋迴轉，於咽喉中口中生瘡，下門生瘡；若㿇㿇蟲血中流行，則生疾病，疲頓困極，不欲飲食；若酢蟲瞋恚，亦令其人得如是病。如是一切諸蟲及其種類，既觀察已，如實知身。
"Furthermore, the practitioner observes inside the body, inspecting the body within the body. Observing each and every kind of worm within the body, what do they do? Through wisdom hearing or with the divine eye, they see: The hair-eating worm, when angered, can devour eyebrows and eyelashes, causing them to fall out, leading to leprosy; the hole-dwelling worm, when angered, moves through the blood, making the body coarse and insensitive, dull and ignorant; the Chan Tumora worm, moving through the blood, or residing in the nose or mouth, makes one's breath foul-smelling; the red worm, when angered, travels through the blood, causing sores in the throat; the juice-eating worm, when angered, travels through the blood, causing the body to develop green, black, or yellow scabs and diseases; the hair lamp worm, when angered, flows in the blood, causing diseases and suffering, ulcers, scabies, yellow fever, scabies, and fissures; the angry blood worm, moving through the blood due to anger, may cause bleeding disorders, itching bodies, scabies, and festering wounds; the blood-eating worm, when angry and causing illness, causes the head to spin, sores in the throat and mouth, and sores in the lower gates; the ulcerous worm, moving through the blood, brings diseases, extreme fatigue, and a lack of desire for food and drink; the vinegar worm, when angered, also causes such diseases. Thus, all these types of worms and their varieties, having been observed, one truly knows the body."

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。觀十種蟲行於陰中。何等為十？一名生瘡蟲；二名刺蟲；三名閉筋蟲；四名動脈蟲；五名食皮蟲；六名動脂蟲；七名和集蟲；八名臭蟲；九名濕蟲；十名熱蟲。
"Furthermore, the practitioner observes the body within the body, noticing the ten types of worms moving in the genitals. What are the ten? One is called the sore-producing worm; two is the stabbing worm; three is the ligament-blocking worm; four is the artery-moving worm; five is the skin-eating worm; six is the fat-moving worm; seven is the gathering worm; eight is the putrid worm; nine is the damp worm; ten is the heat-producing worm."

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。觀何等蟲住我身中，或為疾病或為安隱？彼以聞慧或以天眼見於：瘡蟲隨有瘡處，諸蟲圍遶噉食此瘡，或於咽喉而生瘡病。觀瘡蟲已，如實知身。
"Furthermore, the practitioner observes inside the body, inspecting the body within the body. Observing what kind of worms reside in me, causing diseases or comfort? They, with wisdom hearing or with the divine eye, see: Where there are sores, sore-producing worms are accompanied by various worms that encircle and devour these sores, or sores and diseases may arise in the throat. Having observed the sore-producing worms, one truly knows the body."

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。觀於刺蟲作何等病？彼以聞慧或以天眼見於：刺蟲若生瞋恚，令人下痢猶如火燒，口中乾燥，飲食不消，其身剎剎，水入熟藏，晝夜不睡，於熟藏中撓攪糞穢令尿冷等，與尿和合，住如是處，作下痢病，令不憶食劣弱不健；若人愁惱，蟲則歡喜，嚙人血脈以為衰惱，或下赤血或不消下痢。如是觀刺蟲已，如實知身。
"Furthermore, the practitioner observes inside the body, inspecting the body within the body. Observing what kind of ailments the stabbing worm causes? They, either through wisdom hearing or with the divine eye, see: When the stabbing worms become angry, they cause diarrhea in a person, as if fire burns within, the mouth dries up, food and drink do not digest, the body feels shaky, water enters the matured organs, causing sleeplessness day and night, disturbing the filth within the matured organs to make the urine cold, etc., mixing with the urine. Remaining in such a state, they cause diarrheal disease, making one forget to eat, becoming weak and unhealthy; if a person is saddened, the worms rejoice, gnawing at the person's blood vessels causing decline, either excreting blood or causing undying diarrhea. Having observed the stabbing worms in this manner, one truly knows the body."

正法念處經卷第六十四
Sutra on the Subtle Dharma Foundation of Mindfulness, Scroll Sixty-Four
