#----------------------------------------------------------------------
#【經文資訊】大正新脩大藏經 第 17 冊 No. 721 正法念處經
#【版本記錄】發行日期：2023-12，最後更新：2023-09-23
#【編輯說明】本資料庫由 財團法人佛教電子佛典基金會（CBETA）依「大正新脩大藏經」所編輯
#【原始資料】蕭鎮國大德提供，維習安大德提供之高麗藏 CD 經文，北美某大德提供，Jaero Chen 提供新式標點
#【其他事項】本資料庫可自由免費流通，詳細內容請參閱【財團法人佛教電子佛典基金會資料庫版權宣告】
#----------------------------------------------------------------------

正法念處經卷第六十五元魏婆羅門瞿曇般若流支譯
Sutra on the Subtle Dharma Foundation of Mindfulness, Scroll Sixty-Five, Translated by the Brahmin Gautama Prajñā in the Eastern Wei Dynasty

身念處品之二
The Second Section on Mindfulness of the Body

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。觀閉筋蟲，彼以聞慧或以天眼見：閉筋蟲或行麁筋或行細筋，若覺蟲行，筋則疼痛，若不覺行，筋則不疼痛，一切骨肉皆亦消瘦，筋中疼痛。若蟲瞋恚，人不能食。若住筋中而飲人血，令人無力，若食人肉，令人羸瘦。觀嚙筋蟲已，如實知身。
"Further, practitioners internally inspect their body in detail. They observe the worms within the tissues, discerning through the wisdom of hearing or with the divine eye: these worms either move through coarse or fine tissues. When they sense the movement of the worms, the tissues ache; if not, the tissues do not ache. All bones and muscles likewise become emaciated, with pain in the tissues. If the worms are angry, one cannot eat. If they dwell within the tissues and drink human blood, they render the person weak; if they consume human flesh, they cause the person to become emaciated. Having observed the tissue-chewing worms, one truly understands the body."

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。彼以聞慧或以天眼觀動脈蟲：是蟲遍行一切脈中，其身微細，行無障礙。若蟲住人食脈之中，則有病過，令身乾燥，不憙飲食。若蟲住在水脈之中，則有病生，令口乾燥；若在汗脈，令人一切毛孔無汗；若在尿脈，令人淋病，或令精壞或令痛苦。若蟲瞋恚，行下門中，令人大便閉塞不通，苦惱垂死。觀動脈蟲已，如實知身。
"Further, practitioners internally inspect their body in detail. They observe the worms within the circulatory system, discerning either through the wisdom of hearing or with the divine eye: these worms move throughout all veins, tiny in form and unobstructed in their movements. If the worms reside in the vein that absorbs nutrients, then illnesses occur, causing the body to dry up and lose its desire for food and drink. If the worms reside in the water vein, then a disease arises, causing dry mouth; if in the sweat vein, it causes all pores to be without sweat; if in the urine vein, it results in urinary diseases, either causing semen to be ruined or inducing pain. If the worms are enraged, moving towards the lower outlets, it results in constipation and severe distress as if near death. Observing the worms within the circulatory system thusly, one truly understands the body."

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。觀食皮蟲，彼以聞慧或以天眼見：食皮蟲以食過故，蟲則瞋恚，能令人面顏色醜惡，或生惡皰，或痒或赤或黃或破，或復令其鬚爪墮落，令人惡病，或皮斷壞或肉爛壞。觀食皮蟲已，如實知身。
"Furthermore, practitioners internally inspect their body in detail. Observing the skin-eating worms, perceiving either through the wisdom of hearing or with the divine eye: due to overeating, these worms become angry. They can make one's facial skin ugly and discolored, or cause evil pustules, or itchiness or redness or yellowness or breakage. They may even cause one's hair and nails to fall out, making people suffer from dreadful diseases, or result in skin breaking and flesh rotting. Having observed the skin-eating worms, one truly understands the body."

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。觀嚙脂蟲，彼以聞慧或以天眼見：動脂蟲住在身中脂脈之內，若食有過、若多睡眠，此蟲則瞋，不消飲食，或生疥𭼦或生惡腫，毛根瘭病，或得癭病或脈脹病，或乾消病或身臭病，或食時流汗。如是觀動脂蟲已，如實知身。
"Furthermore, practitioners inspect the interior of their body in detail. Observing the fat-consuming worms, they perceive through the wisdom of hearing or with the divine eye: these worms reside within the arteries of fat in the body. When there is excessive eating or too much sleep, these worms become angry. They do not digest food and drink, potentially causing scabies or evil swellings, hair root diseases, goiter or vascular swelling diseases, wasting diseases or body odor diseases, or causing sweating during eating. Having observed the motion of fat-consuming worms thus, one truly understands the body."

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。觀和集蟲於我身中作何等業，或病或安？彼以聞慧或以天眼見和集蟲集二種身：一者覺身；二、不覺身。皮肉骨血、脂髓精等，是名覺身；髮毛爪齒，名不覺身。是名和集二身。以食過故，蟲則無力，人亦無力，不能速疾行來往返，睡眠𧄼瞢或多焦渴，皮肉骨血、髓精損減。觀和集蟲已，如實知身。
"Furthermore, practitioners internally inspect their body in detail. Observing the aggregating worms within, they inquire what kind of actions are performed by these worms in my body, causing illness or wellbeing? Through the wisdom of listening or with the divine eye, they perceive these aggregating worms forming two types of bodies: one, the sentient body; and two, the insentient body. Skin, flesh, bones, blood, fat, marrow, semen, and the like are known as the sentient body; hair, fur, nails, teeth are called the insentient body. These are named the two aggregates of bodies. Due to overeating, the worms become powerless, and so does the person, unable to swiftly move back and forth, experiencing troubled sleep or heavy drowsiness or intense thirst, with the skin, flesh, bones, blood, marrow, and semen diminished. Having observed the aggregating worms, one truly understands the body."

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。彼以聞慧或以天眼觀於：臭蟲住在肉中、屎尿之中，以食過故，蟲則瞋恚，身肉屎尿、涕唾皆臭，鼻中爛膿或𥄏淚爛臭，隨蟲行處皆悉臭穢，若衣、若敷、若食。住齒中，以蟲臭故，食亦隨臭，衣敷盡臭，舌上多有白垢臭穢，身垢亦臭。觀臭蟲已，如實知身。
"Furthermore, practitioners internally inspect their body in detail. Observing the aggregating worms within, they inquire what kind of actions are performed by these worms in my body, causing illness or wellbeing? Through the wisdom of listening or with the divine eye, they perceive these aggregating worms forming two types of bodies: one, the sentient body; and two, the insentient body. Skin, flesh, bones, blood, fat, marrow, semen, and the like are known as the sentient body; hair, fur, nails, teeth are called the insentient body. These are named the two aggregates of bodies. Due to overeating, the worms become powerless, and so does the person, unable to swiftly move back and forth, experiencing troubled sleep or heavy drowsiness or intense thirst, with the skin, flesh, bones, blood, marrow, and semen diminished. Having observed the aggregating worms, one truly understands the body."

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。彼以聞慧或以天眼見：濕行蟲行背肉中，知食消已，入腰三孔，取人糞穢汁則成尿，滓則為糞，令入下門。觀濕蟲已，如實知身。
"Furthermore, practitioners internally inspect their body in detail. They observe the worms moving within the damp parts and flesh of the back. After recognizing that food has been digested, entering through the three openings in the waist, some juices extracted from human excrement become urine, while the residue becomes feces, directed towards the lower gate. Having observed the damp worms, one truly understands the body."

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。觀十種蟲行於根中，一切人身皆從中生。何等為十？一名㿇㿇蟲；二名惙惙蟲；三名苗花蟲；四名大諂蟲；五名黑蟲；六名大食蟲；七名暖行蟲；八名作熱蟲；九名火蟲；十名大火蟲。此諸蟲等，住陰黃中。
"Furthermore, practitioners internally inspect their body in detail. Observing ten kinds of worms moving at the root, all human bodies are born from therein. What are the ten? One is named the humming worm; two, the groaning worm; three, the sprout flower worm; four, the great flatterer worm; five, the black worm; six, the great eater worm; seven, the warmth-seeking worm; eight, the heat-making worm; nine, the fire worm; ten, the great fire worm. These worms dwell within the hidden yellowness."

「何等是蟲為人疾病或作安隱？彼以聞慧或以天眼見：㿇㿇蟲以食過故，蟲則瞋恚，食人眼𥇒，令人眼痒，多出𥄏淚。此微細蟲若行眼中，眼則多病或令目壞。若入精中，眼生白瞖。其蟲赤色，為眼生病，若蟲不瞋，則無此病。觀㿇㿇蟲已，如實知身。
"Furthermore, practitioners internally inspect their body in detail. Observing ten kinds of worms moving at the root, all human bodies are born from therein. What are the ten? One is named the humming worm; two, the groaning worm; three, the sprout flower worm; four, the great flatterer worm; five, the black worm; six, the great eater worm; seven, the warmth-seeking worm; eight, the heat-making worm; nine, the fire worm; ten, the great fire worm. These worms dwell within the hidden yellowness."

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。彼以聞慧或以天眼見：惙惙蟲住在人身，行於陰中，一切身中行無障礙，陰黃覆身。如此蟲者，若入骨中，令人身體皆大蒸熱；若行肉中，晝夜常熱，手足皆熱；若入皮裏，身則汗出。觀惙惙蟲已，如實知身。
"Furthermore, practitioners internally inspect their body in detail. They observe the groaning worms within the body, discerning either through the wisdom of hearing or with the divine eye: these worms reside in the human body, moving through the hidden darkness, freely roaming throughout all parts of the body without hindrance, their presence concealed by a yellowish tinge. Such worms, if they enter the bones, cause the entire body to experience intense, steaming heat; if they travel within the flesh, there is constant, day and night heat, making the hands and feet warm; if they enter beneath the skin, sweat is produced. Having observed the groaning worms thus, one truly understands the body."

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。彼以聞慧或以天眼見：苗華蟲行住陰中，利𭉨短足，身如火藏，不欲食飲。若以食過，蟲行異處，隨所行處，則大熱爛，身血增長，其身大熱猶如煙起，身皮破壞如火燒瘡。若蟲順行，則無此病。觀苗華蟲已，如實知身。
"Furthermore, practitioners internally inspect their body in detail. They observe the sprout flower worms within the body, discerning either through the wisdom of hearing or with the divine eye: these worms dwell in the hidden darkness, having sharp, short legs, their bodies like fire embers, with no desire to eat or drink. If they overeat, the worms move to a different place. Depending on where they move, there will be a great, burning rot, the flesh and blood of the body increase, the great heat of their body is like smoke arising, and the skin breaks down as if burned by fire. If the worms move smoothly, then this illness does not occur. Having observed the sprout flower worms thus, one truly understands the body."

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。彼以聞慧或以天眼見：大諂蟲住在身中，行陰黃中，或安不安。以食過故，蟲則瞋恚，從頂至足，行無障礙，能令身中一切熱血生於熱瘡。若血、若陰從於口中、耳中流出，或死或次死，或身青黃，熱病口苦。若蟲不瞋，則無此病。觀大諂蟲已，如實知身。
"Furthermore, practitioners internally inspect their body in detail. They observe the great flatterer worms within the body through the wisdom acquired by listening or with the divine eye: these worms reside in the body, freely moving through the hidden yellowness, whether at ease or not. Due to overeating, these worms become angry, moving from the head to the feet without obstruction, causing all hot blood within the body to develop into heat sores. Whether blood or hidden matter flows out from the mouth or ears, it could lead to death or near death situations, turning the body greenish-yellow with feverish sickness and a bitter mouth. If the worms are not enraged, then such diseases do not occur. Having observed the great flatterer worms thus, one truly understands the body."

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。彼以聞慧或以天眼見於黑蟲住在身內，行於黃陰中，或安不安？以食過故，蟲則瞋恚，令人面𩈅或生多黶，或黑或黃或赤，或令身臭或令雀目，或口中生瘡，或大小便處生瘡。若蟲不瞋，則無此病。觀黑蟲已，如實知身。
"Furthermore, practitioners internally inspect their body in detail. They observe the black worms within the body, discerning either through the wisdom of hearing or with the divine eye: Do these worms reside within and move through the hidden yellowness at ease or not? Due to overeating, these worms become angry, causing people’s faces to bruise or develop many dark spots, whether black, yellow, red, or causing body odor or conjunctivitis, or ulcers in the mouth, or ulcers in the genital or anal areas. If the worms are not angry, then such diseases do not occur. Having observed the black worms thus, one truly understands the body."

「復次，修行者內身循身觀，彼以聞慧或以天眼見大食蟲住在身中，或作安隱或為疾病？彼以聞慧或以天眼見：大食蟲以食過故，則生瞋恚，住陰黃中，隨食隨消，身大力故，一切身及身分——眼耳鼻舌，於自境界皆悉減劣，見不明了。以食過故，根不正緣。若蟲不瞋，則無此病。觀大食蟲已，如實知身。
"Furthermore, practitioners internally inspect their body in detail. They perceive through the wisdom of hearing or with the divine eye: the great eating worms dwelling within the body, causing comfort or illness? Through the wisdom of listening or with the divine eye, they perceive: the great eating worms, due to overconsumption, become angry. They dwell within the hidden yellowness, depleting as they consume. Due to their great strength, all parts of the body—eyes, ears, nose, tongue—within their own realms are all diminished, vision becomes unclear. Due to overeating, the roots are improperly influenced. If the worms are not enraged, then these illnesses do not occur. Having observed the great eating worms thus, one truly understands the body."

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。彼以聞慧或以天眼見暖行蟲常愛暖食，憎於冷食。此蟲云何與人疾病？云何安隱？彼以聞慧或以天眼見：暖行蟲，若我食冷或以飲冷，或食或味，蟲則瞋恚，口多出水，或極或重或𭓹或睡，或心陰𧄼瞢或身疼強，或復多唾或咽喉病。若蟲不瞋，則無此病。觀暖行蟲已，如實知身。
"Furthermore, practitioners internally inspect their body in detail. They observe the warmth-loving worms with the wisdom acquired by listening or with the divine eye, noting their fondness for warm food and aversion to cold food. How do these worms relate to human illness or comfort? They discern, through the wisdom of listening or with the divine eye: the warmth-loving worms become angry if I consume or taste something cold, leading to an excess of saliva, extreme or intense reactions, lethargy or sleepiness, confusion or depression of the mind, body pain or stiffness, excessive salivation, or sore throat. If the worms are not angry, then these illnesses do not occur. Having observed the warmth-loving worms thus, one truly understands the body."

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。彼以聞慧或以天眼見於熱蟲住在身內，行於陰中，作何等病？云何安隱？彼以聞慧或以天眼見於：熱蟲住人身中，若食重食，以食過故，病垢增長，妨出入息。以食過故，令身麁大或咽喉塞，令大小便悉皆白色，不愛寒冷、不愛醈食。觀熱蟲已，如實知身。
"Furthermore, practitioners internally inspect their body in detail. They perceive through the wisdom of hearing or with the divine eye: the heat worms residing within the body, moving through the hidden darkness, what kind of diseases do they cause? How do they affect wellbeing? Through the wisdom of listening or with the divine eye, they observe: heat worms dwelling within the human body, if one consumes heavy or excessive food, due to overeating, the disease filth grows, hindering the coming and going of breath. Due to overeating, it causes the body to become coarse and large or obstructs the throat, turns urine and feces entirely white, and results in disliking cold, disliking rich food. Having observed the heat worms, one truly understands the body."

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。彼以聞慧或以天眼見：火食蟲住在身內，行住陰中，此蟲寒時，則便歡喜，熱時萎弱。寒歡喜故，人則憶食；熱時火增，不欲飲食。於冬寒時陰則清涼，熱則陰發，如是火食蟲如是憎火。觀火食蟲已，如實知身。
"Furthermore, practitioners internally inspect their body in detail. They discern either through the wisdom of listening or with the divine eye: the fire-consuming worms reside within the body, moving through the hidden darkness. When it is cold, these worms rejoice; when it is hot, they become weak. Due to their joy in cold, people then crave food; when it is hot and the inner fire increases, there is no desire to eat or drink. In the cold of winter, the hidden darkness is clear and cool; when hot, the hidden darkness spreads. Thus, the fire-consuming worms despise fire. Having observed the fire-consuming worms, one truly understands the body."

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。見大火蟲，此蟲云何令人疾病或令安隱？彼以聞慧或以天眼見大火蟲：若人性所不便而強食之，以食過故，蟲則瞋恚，噉身內蟲，以是過故，令人腸痛或脚疼手疼，隨食蟲處，則皆疼痛。若蟲不瞋，則無如上所說諸病。觀黃陰蟲已，如實知身。
"Furthermore, practitioners internally inspect their body in detail. They perceive through the wisdom of hearing or with the divine eye: the great fire worms. How do these worms cause illness or peace? If one consumes what is unsuitable for their nature, thus overeating, these worms become enraged, biting the internal worms due to this excess, causing people to suffer from intestinal pain or pain in their legs and hands. The pain occurs wherever the worms are consumed. If the worms are not enraged, then such diseases as mentioned do not occur. Having observed the great fire worms, one truly understands the body."

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。彼以聞慧或以天眼觀於骨中有十種蟲，何等為十？一名舐骨蟲；二名嚙骨蟲；三名割節蟲；四名赤口臭蟲；五名爛蟲；六名赤口蟲；七名頭頭摩蟲；八名食皮蟲；九名風刀蟲；十名刀口蟲。如是骨蟲，云何疾病？云何安隱？彼以聞慧或以天眼見：舐骨蟲住於骨外，住多骨處，或住髀骨、脛骨、臂骨、脊骨，如是一切骨中或行脈中，以食過故，蟲則瞋恚，令骨疼痛或令骨動，令人色惡。食近骨肉，令骨大疼，若蟲不瞋，則無如向所說諸病。觀骨蟲已，如實知身。
"Furthermore, practitioners internally inspect their body in detail. They discern through the wisdom of hearing or with the divine eye: there are ten types of worms in the bones. What are the ten? One is named the bone-licking worm; two, the bone-nibbling worm; three, the joint-severing worm; four, the red-mouthed malodorous worm; five, the rotten worm; six, the red-mouthed worm; seven, the head-rubbing worm; eight, the skin-eating worm; nine, the wind blade worm; ten, the blade-mouth worm. Regarding such bone worms, how do they cause diseases? How do they bring about comfort? Through the wisdom of hearing or with the divine eye, they see: the bone-licking worm resides outside the bones, staying in places with numerous bones or inhabits the femur, tibia, arm bone, and spine. In all such bones or within the veins, due to overeating, the worms become angry, causing the bones to ache or move, making one's complexion unsightly. Eating close to the bones causes severe pain in the bones. If the worms are not angry, then the various diseases mentioned previously do not occur. Having observed the bone worms, one truly understands the body."

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。彼以聞慧或以天眼見：嚙骨蟲遍住一切身骨之中，若蟲嚙骨，諸大乾消，其聲破散，下痢不調，或兩脇痛、鼻塞歐吐，不憶飲食。若蟲不嚙一切諸骨，其人則無如是等病。觀嚙骨蟲已，如實知身。
"Furthermore, practitioners internally inspect their body in detail. They observe the bone-nibbling worms with the wisdom of hearing or with the divine eye, perceiving: the worms infest all the bones within the body. If the worms nibble on the bones, then the body's fluids dry up, their sound cracks and disperses, diarrhea becomes uncontrollable, there might be pain on both sides, stuffed nose or vomiting, with no recollection of eating or drinking. If the worms do not nibble on the bones, then such ailments are absent. Having observed the bone-nibbling worms thus, one truly understands the body."

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。彼以聞慧或以天眼見割節蟲：以食過故，蟲則瞋恚，或身、身分，頭痛、心痛，或於城邑聚落多人之處謂為空廓，鼻塞心惱，以痛惱故，於好色聲香味觸中，心不愛樂。若割節蟲調順不瞋，則無如向所說諸病。觀割節蟲已，如實知身。
"Furthermore, practitioners internally inspect their body in detail. They perceive through the wisdom of hearing or with the divine eye: the joint-severing worms become angry due to overconsumption, causing either the body or parts of the body to ache, headache, heartache, or considering crowded places in towns or villages as empty and vast, with blocked nose and distressed heart. Due to such suffering, their heart does not delight in beautiful forms, sounds, smells, tastes, or touches. If the joint-severing worms are calm and not enraged, then they are free from the various diseases mentioned. Having observed the joint-severing worms thus, one truly understands the body."

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。彼以聞慧或以天眼見於臭蟲住在身中，或為疾病或作安隱。彼以聞慧或以天眼見此臭蟲：以食過故，蟲則瞋恚，令身重熱，或生赤色、黑色痶瘓，身汗多出，不能睡眠，即成癩病，一切身分皆悉爛臭。若蟲不瞋，則無如向所說諸病。觀臭蟲已，如實知身。
"Furthermore, practitioners internally inspect their body in detail. They discern through the wisdom of hearing or with the divine eye: the stink worms residing within the body, causing illness or comfort. Through the wisdom of listening or with the divine eye, they see these stink worms: due to overeating, the worms become angry, causing the body to overheat, or to develop red or black gangrene, excessive sweating, an inability to sleep, eventually leading to leprosy, with all parts of the body becoming rotten and foul-smelling. If the worms are not angry, then the aforementioned diseases do not occur. Having observed the stink worms, one truly understands the body."

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。彼以聞慧或以天眼見爛骨蟲住在身內，或為疾病或作安隱。彼以聞慧或以天眼見爛骨蟲：以食過故，蟲則瞋恚，或一歲、二歲乃至多年，或年少時，被傷瘡瘢，雖復除差，至老猶發。如是爛蟲，久久乃發，令骨壞爛，體生赤瘡，如優曇鉢羅果臭爛可惡。其瘡大痒，多有膿血從瘡流出，眾蠅封著，蚊蝱唼食。若爛骨蟲調順不瞋，則無如向所說之病。觀爛骨蟲已，如實知身。
"Furthermore, practitioners internally inspect their body in detail. They discern through the wisdom of hearing or with the divine eye: the rotten bone worms residing within the body, causing either illness or a state of ease. Through the wisdom of listening or with the divine eye, they observe these rotten bone worms: due to overconsumption, these worms become enraged. This may manifest as a bone wound that, although healed when one is young, recurs and worsens with age. Such rot, emerging after a long time, causes the bones to decompose and forms ulcers on the body, as repulsive and foul-smelling as a rotten Udambara fruit. The ulcer itches severely, oozing pus and blood, attracting swarms of flies and being nibbled by mosquitoes and flies. If the rotten bone worms are harmonious and not angered, then the diseases mentioned previously do not occur. Having observed the rotten bone worms, one truly understands the body."

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。彼以聞慧或以天眼見赤口蟲住身骨中，作何等病？云何安隱？彼以聞慧或以天眼見赤口蟲：以食過故，則生瞋恚，其蟲赤色過於火色，令人身體日夜汗流作血癖病。若赤口蟲調順不瞋，則無如向所說之病。觀赤口蟲已，如實知身。
"Furthermore, practitioners internally inspect their body in detail. They discern, through the wisdom of hearing or with the divine eye, the red-mouthed worms residing within the bones. What kind of diseases do these worms cause? How do they affect well-being? Through the wisdom of hearing or with the divine eye, they see the red-mouthed worms: due to overeating, they become enraged. Their red color surpasses the color of fire, causing the person’s body to sweat profusely day and night, leading to diseases characterized by a craving for blood. If the red-mouthed worms are harmonious and not angry, then the diseases mentioned do not occur. Having observed the red-mouthed worms, one truly understands the body."

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。彼以聞慧或以天眼見頭頭摩蟲住在骨中，行於骨中，云何此蟲令人疾病？云何安隱？彼以聞慧或以天眼見頭頭摩蟲：以食過故，蟲則瞋恚，能令人身周遍生瘡。若蟲行時，令人頻申，心動忪忪，或如失身或身動搖，不能睡眠，身體痒相猶如蟲行，目視不明，得寒熱病或身體腫。若頭頭摩蟲不瞋，則無如向所說諸病。觀頭頭摩蟲已，如實知身。
"Furthermore, practitioners internally inspect their body in detail. They discern through the wisdom of hearing or with the divine eye: seeing the head-rubbing worms residing within the bones, moving throughout the bones. How do these worms cause diseases? How do they bring comfort? They discern through the wisdom of hearing or with the divine eye: the head-rubbing worms, due to overconsumption, become enraged, capable of causing sores all over one's body. When the worms move, they cause frequent stretching, agitation in the heart, as if losing control of the body or the body shaking, inability to sleep, the body itching as though the worms are moving through it, blurred vision, suffering from cold and heat diseases or swelling in the body. If the head-rubbing worms are not enraged, then the various diseases mentioned do not occur. Having observed the head-rubbing worms thus, one truly understands the body."

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。彼以聞慧或以天眼見食皮蟲住在身中，或為疾病或為安隱。彼以聞慧或以天眼見食皮蟲：以食過故，蟲則瞋恚，脣口及眼皆生諸瘡，兩脇生瘡。若行筋中，或復嚙筋，能令其人咽喉乾燥，或復聾塞，耳中膿出，或髑髏上剎剎而行，或非時頭白，咽喉瘶病，非時睡眠，或憎飲食，不樂一處，樂行空地，心或多亂，狂說是非。蟲食皮故，一切身分爴裂破壞，塵土坌身。若蟲不瞋，則無如向所說諸病。觀食皮蟲已，如實知身。
"Furthermore, practitioners internally inspect their body in detail. They observe the skin-eating worms through the wisdom of hearing or with the divine eye, causing illness or a state of ease. Through the wisdom of hearing or with the divine eye, they see the skin-eating worms: due to overeating, these worms become enraged, causing ulcers on the lips, mouth, and eyes, and ulcers on both sides. When moving through the tendons, or even biting the tendons, they can cause the person's throat to become dry, or result in deafness, pus in the ears, or move atop the skull, causing premature graying of hair, throat diseases, inappropriate sleep, aversion to food and drink, displeasure in staying at one location, preference for moving about in open spaces, mental unrest, madness in speaking of rights and wrongs. Due to the worms eating the skin, all body parts are cracked and damaged, covered in dust and dirt. If the worms are not enraged, then the diseases mentioned do not occur. Having observed the skin-eating worms thus, one truly understands the body."

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。彼以聞慧或以天眼見風刀蟲行於骨中，以蟲瞋故，或為疾病或為安隱。彼以聞慧或以天眼見風刀蟲：以食過故，蟲則瞋恚，猶如蛇螫，痛毒難忍，所謂頭頂、咽喉心胞、大小便處，手足甲中亦如針刺。以蟲嚙嚙，鼻則失香，舌不知味，其目瞤動，不憶飲食。以蟲瞋故，與骨行蟲共害其身，以痛多故，晝夜不睡。若蟲不瞋，則無如向所說之病。觀風刀蟲已，如實知身。
"Furthermore, practitioners internally inspect their body in detail. They observe the skin-eating worms through the wisdom of hearing or with the divine eye, causing illness or a state of ease. Through the wisdom of hearing or with the divine eye, they see the skin-eating worms: due to overeating, these worms become enraged, causing ulcers on the lips, mouth, and eyes, and ulcers on both sides. When moving through the tendons, or even biting the tendons, they can cause the person's throat to become dry, or result in deafness, pus in the ears, or move atop the skull, causing premature graying of hair, throat diseases, inappropriate sleep, aversion to food and drink, displeasure in staying at one location, preference for moving about in open spaces, mental unrest, madness in speaking of rights and wrongs. Due to the worms eating the skin, all body parts are cracked and damaged, covered in dust and dirt. If the worms are not enraged, then the diseases mentioned do not occur. Having observed the skin-eating worms thus, one truly understands the body."

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。彼以聞慧或以天眼見刀口蟲住在身中，此蟲或為疾病或作安隱。彼以聞慧或以天眼見：刀口蟲始於母胎，初出生時，此蟲初生，以法勝故，始出胎藏飲母乳故，是時此蟲盡食餘蟲，後還雜食。以是因緣，餘蟲還生。觀刀口蟲已，如實知身。「此十種蟲行於骨中，如實觀之。如實觀已，眼離塵垢，離凡夫過，心生厭惡，離我、我所，離疑清淨，離於邪見，如實知身乃至涅槃。
"Furthermore, practitioners internally inspect their body in detail. They discern either through the wisdom of listening or with the divine eye: the blade-mouth worms residing within the body, causing illness or a state of ease. Through the wisdom of listening or with the divine eye, they see: the blade-mouth worms originate from the mother's womb, and at the time of birth, these worms are born as well. Due to the dominance of natural law, as they begin to emerge from the womb and consume the mother's milk, these worms consume other worms, and later, consume mixed foods. Because of this cause and effect, other worms are born again. Having observed the blade-mouth worms, one truly understands the body. 'After observing these ten kinds of worms within the bones, one sees them as they truly are. After true observation, one's eyes are free from defilements, away from the common man's transgressions. The mind generates disgust, freed from 'I' and 'mine,' purified from doubt, distanced from wrong views, truly understanding the body all the way to Nirvana."

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。彼以聞慧或以天眼見十種蟲行於屎中，何等為十？一名生蟲；二名針口蟲；三名白節蟲；四名無足蟲；五名散汁蟲；六名三燋蟲；七名破腸蟲；八名閉塞蟲；九名善色蟲；十名穢門瘡蟲。其色可惡，住糞穢中，作何等病？云何安隱？
"Furthermore, practitioners observe internally, examining their own body. Through the wisdom gained from listening or with the divine eye, they see ten kinds of worms moving in excrement. What are these ten? One is called the birth worm; two, the needle-mouth worm; three, the white-segment worm; four, the footless worm; five, the juice-scattering worm; six, the triple-burning worm; seven, the intestine-breaking worm; eight, the obstructing worm; nine, the well-colored worm; ten, the sore-producing worm of filth. Their appearance is repulsive, dwelling in filth and excrement. What diseases do they cause? How do they bring about comfort?"

「彼以聞慧或以天眼見於：生蟲行糞穢中，若蟲燒熱，我身亦熱。若蟲冷病，我亦冷病，下痢白膿，令身損減，顏色萎黃。若此生蟲調順不瞋，則無如向所說之病。觀生蟲已，如實知身。

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。彼以聞慧或以天眼見：針口蟲行糞穢中，其身長大，從於熟藏行趣生藏，一切諸蟲皆不能遮，復從生藏上至咽喉，唾吐俱出，或作心痛或令不安。以火弱故，與糞俱出，須臾即死。觀針口蟲已，如實知身。

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。彼以聞慧或以天眼見：白節蟲行糞穢中，身短白色，多蟲相續，冷而大臭，破壞人力，隨糞俱出，眾蠅封愛。有此病者，糞穢益多，不憶飲食。觀白節蟲已，如實知身。

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。彼以聞慧或以天眼見無足蟲住在身中，此蟲云何為人疾病？云何安隱？彼以聞慧或以天眼見無足蟲：以食過故，蟲則瞋恚，吹一切風氣塞大小便，若塞生藏，不能嘔吐亦不能嚏，不能頻申，疲極不安，不能睡眠，不耐飢渴。以蟲瞋故，多生諸病。觀無足蟲已，如實知身。

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。彼以聞慧或以天眼見散汁蟲住在身中，為消食故，於汁流處撥令分散，於身分中與汁俱行，乃至於足，從足至頂一切身分汁遍流故，眾人說之，以為好色；若汁不流，色則醜惡。觀散汁蟲已，如實知身。

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。彼以聞慧或以天眼見：三燋蟲住在身中，若我熱病，蟲增垢惡，生藏不安，火大增動。以熱病故，蟲亦熱病，遍身奔走，熱惱自燋。以蟲瞋故，味流之脈皆悉乾燥，渴病頭痛。觀三燋蟲已，如實知身。

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。彼以聞慧或以天眼見破腸蟲住在身中，此蟲云何而作疾病？云何安隱？彼以聞慧或以天眼見破腸蟲：若人多食飲食味故，諸蟲逼迫，蟲則生瞋，嚙破人腸，或心脹痛或令風脹，或令熱脹或令冷脹，得如是等種種苦惱。是破腸蟲傷害人腸，若蟲調順，則無如向所說之病。觀破腸蟲已，如實知身。

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。彼以聞慧或以天眼見閉塞蟲住在身中，此蟲云何為人疾病？云何安隱？彼以聞慧或以天眼見：閉塞蟲行糞穢中，若我飲食，其蟲亦食，食已閉塞，以食過故，傷害流脈，傷於火大，所食腸脹，屈腸戾腸，或時令人心痛腸痛。觀閉塞蟲已，如實知身。

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。彼以聞慧或以天眼見善色蟲住在身中，此蟲云何而為疾病？云何安隱？彼以聞慧或以天眼見善色蟲：若我食時，或食好肉或食惡肉或食重食，蟲於身中為作安隱，口中取味，走遍身中，令無病惱，氣力增長，斷除諸病，住在身中。以福德故，蟲有大力，人則有色，氣力充足。若蟲無力，人亦瘦瘠，色貌憔悴。觀善色蟲已，如實知身。

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。彼以聞慧或以天眼見下門瘡蟲住在身中，云何為我而作疾病？云何安隱？彼以聞慧或以天眼見：下門瘡蟲以食相違，蟲則瞋恚，生種種瘡，或生濕瘡或生乾瘡，或前生瘡或後生瘡，或生熱瘡。若蟲瞋恚，閉塞穢門，糞流之脈，若血流脈、若汁流脈，或以火少，不消飲食。以火少故，穢門生瘡。以蟲瞋故，作種種病，若蟲不瞋，則無如向所說諸病。觀穢門瘡蟲已，如實知身。

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。彼以聞慧或以天眼見十種蟲行於髓中，有行精中，何等為十？一名毛蟲；二名黑口蟲；三名無力蟲；四名大痛蟲；五名煩悶蟲；六名火色蟲；七名下流蟲；八名起身根蟲；九名憶念蟲；十名歡喜蟲。

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。彼以聞慧或以天眼見：有髓蟲名曰毛蟲，一切身分皆悉生毛，若此蟲瞋，令髓傷害，既與其過，便食人髓，令人癩病，顏色醜惡，骨髓疼痛，皆失氣力。若毛蟲調順，不生瞋恚，則無如向所說諸病。觀毛蟲已，如實知身。

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。彼以聞慧或以天眼見：黑口蟲住於髓中，一切身中行無障礙，若蟲瞋恚，能令髓融，以傷髓故，令人色惡，曲脊身傴，行步不便，柱杖而行，顏色憔悴，身體振掉。若黑口蟲調順不瞋，則無如向所說諸病。觀黑口蟲已，如實知身。

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。彼以聞慧或以天眼見：少力蟲住在身中，此蟲食髓，若髓不足，蟲則無力，蟲無力故，人亦無力。復有餘蟲，亦食人髓，為於強蟲之所陵逼，人則苦惱。觀無力蟲已，如實知身。

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。彼以聞慧或以天眼見：大痛蟲遊行髓中，流轉常行，遍諸身界，此蟲能為諸病因緣，遍諸根中膿汁流出，不能睡眠。觀大痛蟲已，如實知身。

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。彼以聞慧或以天眼見於：悶蟲住在身中，行於微細心流脈中，與脈為妨。以妨脈故，則得心病，心悶欲吐，顏色弊惡，不欲飲食，或熱病心痛猶如刀割。見外蟲時，心悶欲吐。觀悶蟲已，如實知身。

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。彼以聞慧或以天眼見：有諸蟲名曰下流，行精流脈中，若食好食、發欲之食，令精增長，如此蟲等，於尿流脈中引精令出。觀下流蟲已，如實知身。

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。彼以聞慧或以天眼見：起根蟲住在胞中，若尿滿胞，蟲則歡喜，既歡喜已，以尿因緣，令身根起，此是一切愚癡凡夫不善觀門。觀起根蟲已，如實知身。

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。彼以聞慧或以天眼見憶念歡喜蟲作何疾病？云何安隱？若蟲歡喜有力，多見諸夢或善不善，以蟲過故、以蟲流行於心脈故，夢見眾相。觀憶念蟲已，如實知身。

「如是那羅帝婆羅門長者聚落修行比丘作是觀已，如實觀身。如是身者，何者是常、不動不壞？何者為樂？何者是我？何者是淨？何者可恃？彼以聞慧或以天眼見：此身中若麁若細，無有一法是常、不動不壞、若樂若淨、若我而可依恃。譬如有人求日中闇，若麁若細皆不可得；身亦如是，若有求其常樂我淨，亦不可得，是名修行者內身循身觀。作是觀時，遠離魔界，近涅槃道，愛不能亂，及餘煩惱不能為礙，是名內身循身觀。

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。有何等風住在身中，若調不調，作何等業？彼以聞慧或以天眼見心轉風住在身中。云何心風能運轉身？彼以聞慧或以天眼見：心轉風以風調故，能轉其身或行或住、或俯或仰、或作眾事，以風力故，或安或危。觀心轉風已，如實知身，是名內身循身觀。

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。有何等風住在身中，若調不調，作何等業？彼以聞慧或以天眼見爪甲風住在身中，若不調順，為何所作？彼以聞慧或以天眼見：手足爪甲以風因緣而得增長，乃至老朽，是名觀於爪甲之風。如是修行者觀身內風，以風堅故，手足爪甲亦成堅實，速得增長。比丘如是觀身爪甲，如實知身。

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。有何等風住在身中，若調不調，作何等業？彼以聞慧或以天眼見足下風住在身中，若不調順，為何所作？彼以聞慧或以天眼見：足下風若不調順，能生搔痒，既生搔痒，能令生瘡，或於行時，蹈地有聲，令足骨堅，耐於寒熱。又此足筋，通於眼脈，以油灌鼻，以油塗足，令眼明淨。觀足下風已，如實知身。

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。有何等風住在身中，若調不調，作何等業？彼以聞慧或以天眼見不覺風住在身中，或調不調，為何所作？彼以聞慧或以天眼見：不覺風住於皮內，令𨄔㿇㿇，以風力故，令𨄔皮內猶如蟻行，若以手捺瘡如蟻蟲。觀不覺風已，如實知身。

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。有何等風住在身中，若調不調，作何等業？彼以聞慧或以天眼觀見有風名曰破骨，住在身中，若不調順，為何所作？彼以聞慧或以天眼見：破骨風或晝或夜，或行或住，或在園林或在寺舍，或疲極時，破骨苦痛不得睡眠，手足不便，不能屈伸。觀破骨風已，如實知身。

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。有何等風作何等業？彼以聞慧或以天眼見有一風名曰破行，住在身中，若不調順，為何所作？彼以聞慧或以天眼見：破行風若不調順，此風則發，以為惱亂，不能行步，去來進趣。觀破行風已，如實知身。

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。有何等風住在身中，若調不調，作何等業？彼以聞慧或以天眼見破踝風住在身中，為作何等？彼以聞慧或以天眼見：破節風若得冷觸，令䏶骨疼遍於身中。觀破節風已，如實知身。

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。有何等風住在身中，若調不調作何等業？彼以聞慧或以天眼見破䏶骨風住在身中，若不調順，為何所作？彼以聞慧或以天眼見：破髀骨風若不調順，令其䏶內汁流之脈，洪麁甚壯，令脚屈伸，兩髀相近，肉重膇起。如是觀破髀風已，如實知身。

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。有何等風住在身中，若調不調，作何等業？彼以聞慧或以天眼見有節風住在身中，為何所作？彼以聞慧或以天眼見：有節風於兩肩四節、咽喉二節、額骨二節、鼻骨一節、頤骨一節、牙齒骨有三十二節、上腭一節、交牙二節、項十五節、兩膊二節、兩肘二節、兩腕二節、脊骨數有四十五節、胸十四節、左右脇肋各十二節、兩脇肋端各有脆骨二十四節、橫骨一節、跨骨二節、身根一節、兩髀二節、兩膝二節、兩踝二節、足跟二節、足趺二節、兩手二足上下合有六十節、手足爪甲合二十節，此是節風之所依也，若我有病，或致喪命，或致苦惱。觀節風已，如實知身。

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。有何等風住在身中，若調不調，為何所作？彼以聞慧或以天眼見髀頑風住在身中，若不調順為何所作？彼以聞慧或以天眼見：髀頑風若不調順，不能屈伸，不能行來，以病過故。觀髀頑風已，如實知身。

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。有何等風住在身中，若調不調，作何等業？彼以聞慧或以天眼見：身行界風住在身中，若不調順，為何所作？彼以聞慧或以天眼見：身界風調順安隱，則有氣力，氣行出入，能消飲食，身有顏色，眼耳鼻舌身皆安隱，所食消化。若不調順，身色麁惡，五根減劣，飲食不消，顏色不悅，眼等諸根於境劣弱，不產子孕。如是觀身行界風已，如實知身。

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。有何等風住在身中，若調不調，作何等業？彼以聞慧或以天眼見：抽筋風住在身中，若不調順，為何所作？彼以聞慧或以天眼見抽筋風：若風調順，諸有所作，若眠若住，一切身色皆悉光澤，皆是筋風之所為作。若不調順，不能修作，若眠若住，一切不能有所施作。觀筋風已，如實知身。

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。有何等風住在身中，若調不調，作何等業？彼以聞慧或以天眼觀見有風名曰往返，住在身內，若不調順，為何所作？彼以聞慧或以天眼見：往返風若不調順，閉身流脈，令作淋病，一切身分皆悉疼痛，腹痛、身根疼痛，不能飲食，精血竭盡，不產子孕。若風調適，則無此病。觀往返風已，如實知身。

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。有何等風住在身中，若調不調，作何等業？彼以聞慧或以天眼觀見有風名節行惱亂，住在身中，若不調順，為何所作？彼以聞慧或以天眼見：節行惱亂風若不調順，令人生癖或生痔病，便利苦惱，四大枯悴，或令頭痛，飲食不消，下風不通，身體燋悴，生諸瘡病或生熱病。若行節風調順，則無如上所說諸病。觀行節風已，如實知身。

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。有何等風住我身中，或調不調，作何等業？彼以聞慧或以天眼觀見有風名破毛爪糞，住在身中，若不調順，為何所作？彼以聞慧或以天眼見：破毛爪糞風若不調順，諸根瘦損，或復頭痛，或一眼一耳半面疼痛，或目視𥇀𥇀，或復鼻塞不知香臭，面色萎黃，欬逆嘔唾，見不淨時即便嘔吐，其心多亂，不能禪思。常念：『身心無病安隱，人身之中受想行識，四陰住處，此身所攝，一切無常。』作是觀已，知生死法。觀破毛爪屎風已，如實知身。

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。有何等風住我身中作何等業？彼以聞慧或以天眼見：亂精沫風於小便中，能令其人精尿俱出，細如芥子，與尿俱出，或大便疼。作如是病，惱亂其心，不得專一，若風調順，則無此病。觀亂精風已，如實知身。

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。有何等風住在身中，或作安隱或不安隱？彼以聞慧或以天眼見有老風住在身中，隨風轉增漸就衰老，氣力微弱，不能去來，須臾欲起，極不從心，行住坐臥，疲極頓乏猶如他身，心睡惽濁。若風調順，則無此病。觀老風已，如實知身。

「復次，修行者內身循身觀。有何等風住我身中，或為安隱或不安隱？彼以聞慧或以天眼見：塞胞風住在身中，若不調順，身肉瞤動，身羸心痛，屎尿閉塞，便利澁難，妨於修禪，得大苦惱，心意散亂，識不安隱，不能觀法。以身苦故，不能念法。若風調順，則無如向所說諸病。觀塞胞風已，如實知身。

正法念處經卷第六十五
