#----------------------------------------------------------------------
#【經文資訊】大正新脩大藏經 第 17 冊 No. 721 正法念處經
#【版本記錄】發行日期：2023-12，最後更新：2023-09-23
#【編輯說明】本資料庫由 財團法人佛教電子佛典基金會（CBETA）依「大正新脩大藏經」所編輯
#【原始資料】蕭鎮國大德提供，維習安大德提供之高麗藏 CD 經文，北美某大德提供，Jaero Chen 提供新式標點
#【其他事項】本資料庫可自由免費流通，詳細內容請參閱【財團法人佛教電子佛典基金會資料庫版權宣告】
#----------------------------------------------------------------------

No. 721
正法念處經敘
Preface to the Sutra on the Subtle Dharma Foundation of Mindfulness.

夫域中之名四等，道之所生萬殊，名蓋眾名之假，生非有生之實。然則修促共盡，小大同期，而金字絲編、緗交素篆，分途列道、門張戶設，既昧斷惑之境，未接息言之路，詎能探神測妙，苞總無邊？有聖將應，靈因曠遠，志遺髮膚，施單城國。及繁星駐彩，夕馬騰空，出四門以結念，處三夜而圓果，十力在己、八解俱照，智兼一切、慈洽萬方，既而法吼傍震，甘露降灑：鷲山、祗樹之下，鹿苑、連河之地。眾出恒沙，徒繁林竹，反窮迷于升極，啟重昏于鐙炬。雖鵠林興慕，檀薪已然，教義不忘，風聲逾被。壽陵仰丹素之工，清臺寫金玉之質，水骨流暉，園閭加等，遺契餘旨，薄傳前載，幽宗絕唱，方備茲辰。使持節大將軍領中書監攝吏部尚書京畿大都督渤海王世子高公，道風虛邁，神衿峻遠，負日月于中衢，擊雷霆于上路，德表生民，作舟梁于夷夏，器含群物，制天淵于廟堂，殊流共委，酌而不竭，異軫同騖，仰以知歸。黃扉南闢，鈴閤東啟，則有高士通才、幽人偉器，懱其漢爵之重，鄙其南岳之游，曳裾高步，自得門下，俱申前趣之禮，竝應却行之眷。蓋以書奏多方，術呈異等，或披卷而止，或一貫獨得，每留神釋典、洞叩玄門，以夫照壁瀉瓶，遺文必舉，非徒九部，寧止十二。逷矣西方，路超百宿，精力苦心，不憚重繭，故能法藏流行，異聞俱湊。爰有舍城妙說時將感通，法螺良藥響授斯在。從善業之本，極身念之際，標品有七、明義者五，至如違俗絕世，託想菩提，眷彼天人，深嗟鬼畜，鑒茲因果，冥心是緣，篤誠修行，又悟前旨，載懷依仰，形殊理一，大覺下臨，昭然獨曉，四攝六通，網羅群智，贊揚妙德，事屬斯文。直以風殊俗舛，詞翰乖絕，傾耳注目，隔若山河，將恐靈教有虧，玄旨多墜。有婆羅門人瞿曇流支，比丘曇林、僧昉等，竝鉤深索隱，言通理接，延居第館，四事無違，乃譯明茲典，名「正法念處」。起自興和歲陽玄默，終于武定淵獻之季，條流積廣，合七十卷。微言不昧，弘之在我，大崇覺典，尅宣靈迹。此乃濟四部于法橋，刷六塵于定水，心殷業重，無德而言。雖龍樹不追、馬鳴日遠，申法尊道，夫豈異昔？所以緇素擊節，雅俗傾首，義有存焉，永法三界。云爾。

In that region, there are names for four equal parts, the paths where myriad distinctions arise, names are but temporary labels for the multitude, and life does not truly possess the reality of birth. Yet, expedited cultivation and shared exhaustion, the small and the great existing concurrently, with texts interwoven in golden threads, and white banners crisscrossed, pathways distinguished, gates and doorways established - having not yet escaped the boundary of confusion nor connected with the road of silent contemplation, how could they probe the divine and measure the profound, or encompass the limitless in their embrace? When saints should respond, their spiritual cause is vast and remote, dedicating beyond skin and hair, providing solely to cities and nations. With stars lingering in splendor, evening horses soaring through the void, exiting through the four gates to form connections, staying three nights to complete fruition, ten powers residing within, eight freedoms illuminating together, wisdom enveloping all, compassion reaching to all corners - then, with the Dharma's roar echoing close by, nectar descending in sprinkles: beneath eagle peak, among the trees of sustenance, in the deer park, by the connecting rivers. Countless emerge like the sands of Ganges, disciples multiplying like forests of bamboo, yet reversing the maze to ascendancy, igniting greater confusion than a torch in darkness. Though the goose forest stirs admiration, and the sandalwood has already ignited, the teachings are not forgotten, the sound of the wind even more enveloping. The longevity mound admires the work of cinnabar and plainness, the clear platform depicts the essence of gold and jade, the luminescence of 'water bones' streams forth, the neighborhoods receive equal enhancement, leaving behind covenants and intentions, thinly passing on previous generations, the secluded chants now cease, thus preparing for this moment. The Grand Marshal holding the imperial insignia, leading the central secretariat, acting minister of appointments, regional commander of the capital and the Crown Prince of Bohai, moves with an ethereal Daoist air, his divine collar lofty and far-reaching, bearing the sun and moon at the crossroads, striking thunderbolts on the higher path, his virtue signals to the populace, constructing bridges for the barbarians and the Chinese, his vessel containing multitudes, regulating the celestial abyss within palace halls, blending streams without depletion, drawing but never exhausting, diverging at the milestones knowing the way back. With the yellow gates opening south and the bell chambers unveiling east, there stand distinguished scholars with profound talent and recluses of exceptional caliber, scorning the heavy honors of the Han and the excursions to the southern peaks, trailing their robes in lofty strides, finding solace beneath my door, jointly extending courtesies of former pursuits, together turning back with special affection. Given that presentations were numerous and skills shown varied, some halted with a single scroll, while others uniquely grasped the continuous thread, often meditating on the Buddhist canons, deeply questioning the mysteries, as when facing a wall or decanting a pitcher, their texts inevitably mentioned, not just the nine divisions, stopping at twelve. Far off towards the west, tracing paths beyond a hundred lodgings, with concerted energy and painstaking heart, undaunted by repeated endeavors, hence capable of diffusing the Dharma treasure, gathering strange tales altogether. Here lies the wondrous exaltation of the Scythian city, where the spiral conch of Dharma medicine sonorously imparts - it's present. From the root of good deeds, at the peak moment of bodily mindfulness, distinguishing seven classifications and five interpretations of meaning, as to defy convention and sever from the world, entrusting thoughts towards Bodhi, cherishing those celestial beings, deeply lamenting over spirits and beasts, contemplating these causes and effects, deeply focused on this connection, earnestly cultivating the practice, again comprehending previous intents, carrying forward with veneration, differing in form yet united in principle, with great awakening overseeing below, brightly distinguishing alone, encompassing the four establishments and six supernatural powers, casting nets of collective wisdom, extolling sublime virtues, this matter belongs to elegantly expressed literature. With winds diverging from the norms and scripts drastically different, attentively listening and watching, as separated by mountains and rivers, fearing lest the spiritual teachings suffer loss, and the profound principles drop abundantly. There were Brahmin Gautama Prajñā, Bhikṣu Dharmalin, and Sengfang among others, collectively delving deep and uncovering hidden meanings, seamlessly connecting reason, extending their stay in this lodging, with no deviation from the four matters, hence translating and illuminating this scripture, named "Sutra on the Subtle Dharma Foundation of Mindfulness." Starting from the era of Xinghe's year of mysterious silence to the final moments of Wuding's profound offering, gathering extensively and wide, amounting to seventy volumes. Subtle words not obscured, the expansion is upon us, greatly venerating the Dharma scripture, declaring the spiritual traces. Thus, it aids all four assemblies across the bridge of Dharma, cleansing the six dusts with waters of concentration, the heart earnest, the karma substantial, speaking without virtue. Though Nāgārjuna's pursuit not followed, Aśvaghosha's days distanced, proclaiming the dignity of the Dharma, how could it differ from the past? Hence, the black-clothed (monastics) strike rhythms, the refined and the common bow their heads, righteousness preserved therein, perpetually governing the three realms. So it is.

正法念處經卷第一
Sutra on the Subtle Dharma Foundation of Mindfulness, Volume 1

元魏婆羅門瞿曇般若流支譯
Translated by the Brahmin Gautama Prajñā during the Eastern Wei Dynasty

十善業道品第一
Chapter on the Ten Wholesome Paths of Action, the First

歸命一切諸佛菩薩
Dedication to all Buddhas and Bodhisattvas

如是我聞：
Thus have I heard:

一時，婆伽婆在王舍城遊那羅陀婆羅門村。爾時，慧命舍利弗於晨朝時，共眾多比丘入王舍城，各各行乞。爾時，眾多比丘離慧命舍利弗而行乞食，遂爾往到遮羅迦波離婆闍迦外道所已，共相問訊，彼此歡喜說法語論，迭互相問。
At one time, the Bhagavān was dwelling in the Brahmin village of Uruvilvā, near the city of Rājagṛha. At that time, in the early morning, the venerable Śāriputra, together with a great assembly of bhikṣus, entered the city of Rājagṛha for alms-round. During this time, the assembly of bhikṣus, having separated from the venerable Śāriputra, went for alms food, and afterwards, they reached the place of the externalist (tīrthika) Jālakabharadvāja. There, they exchanged greetings, and with mutual joy, they engaged in Dharma discussions, asking each other questions.

彼遮羅迦波離婆闍迦外道問諸比丘言：「汝之釋迦沙門瞿曇說如是法：『欲為不善，是不可愛，非是可樂，非是可意，於他欲者，亦不隨喜。』我亦如是說：『彼身業是不可愛，非是可樂，非是可意，於他欲者，亦不隨喜。』汝之釋迦沙門瞿曇說：『彼口業是不可愛，非是可樂，非是可意，不隨喜他。』我亦如是說：『彼口業是不可愛，非是可樂，非是可意，不隨喜他。』汝之釋迦沙門瞿曇說：『彼意業是不可愛，非是可樂，非是可意，不隨喜他。』我亦如是說：『彼意業是不可愛，非是可樂，非是可意，不隨喜他。』汝之釋迦沙門瞿曇如是法律，為有何異？何意？何勝？若汝釋迦沙門瞿曇如是法律，與我何異，而汝釋迦沙門瞿曇自說：『我是一切智人。』」彼遮羅迦波離婆闍迦外道如是問已，彼諸比丘新出家故，於比丘法未能善解，心不隨喜，是故不答。爾時，眾多比丘既乞食已，離慧命舍利弗，各各皆到那羅陀村，食訖已住。爾時，慧命舍利弗亦乞食已，同共往到那羅陀村。爾時，眾多比丘往到慧命舍利弗所，具說如上。
A heretic from Jalamdhara asked the bhikkhus, "Your Gautama, the Shramana, preaches such a Dharma: 'To wish to do evil is unlovable, not joyful, not agreeable, and one should not delight in the wishes of others who wish for evil.' I also say: 'Physical actions are unlovable, not joyful, not agreeable, and one should not delight in the desires of others.' Your Gautama also says: 'Verbal actions are unlovable, not joyful, not agreeable, and one should not delight in the words of others.' I also say: 'Verbal actions are unlovable, not joyful, not agreeable, and one should not delight in the words of others.' Your Gautama says: 'Mental actions are unlovable, not joyful, not agreeable, and one should not delight in the thoughts of others.' I also say: 'Mental actions are unlovable, not joyful, not agreeable, and one should not delight in the thoughts of others.' What, then, is the difference in the teachings of your Gautama? What is the intention? What is superior? If your Gautama's teachings are no different from mine, why does your Gautama claim, 'I am the All-knowing One'?"

After the heretic from Jalamdhara asked this, those bhikkhus, being new to the order, were unable to understand the Dharma of the bhikkhus well, felt no joy in their hearts, and therefore did not answer. At that time, after many bhikkhus had begged for food, they left and went to the village of Nalanda to rest after their meal. At that time, Shariputra also had begged for food and went to the village of Nalanda with them. Then, many bhikkhus went to where Shariputra was and told him all about the above.

爾時，慧命舍利弗語眾多比丘言：「若我，慧命！共汝相隨王舍城內，同四出巷、同三角巷，即共汝等到遮羅迦波離婆闍迦外道所者，我則能以正法破之。然我在於異四出巷、異三角巷而行乞食，故我如是不聞彼難。彼遮羅迦波離婆闍迦外道前所問難，世尊普眼——諸業果報一切現知，今在此處最為尊勝，一切外道見則降伏，為諸聲聞、諸優婆塞、諸天人等，善說一切業果報法——去此不遠，汝可往問。彼當為汝善說一切業果報法，若天、魔、梵，世間、沙門、婆羅門等所不能說，唯有如來能為汝說。我於彼法未善通達，唯有世尊第一善解業果報法能為汝說。」爾時，眾多比丘向世尊所。
At that time, Shariputra, wise and full of virtue, addressed the multitude of bhikṣus, saying: "Oh, my wise friends! If I were with you inside the city of Rājagṛha, walking together through the four crossroads and the three forked roads, and went with you to the place of the externalist (tīrthika) Jālakabharadvāja, I would have been able to refute him with the correct Dharma. However, I was begging for alms on different four crossroads and different three forked roads, hence I did not hear such difficulties. The challenges posed by the externalist Jālakabharadvāja before, the All-seeing World-Honored One—whose insight encompasses the result of all actions—present here, is the most honorable, subdues all externalists upon sight, and for all śrāvakas, upāsakas, deities, etc., he eloquently teaches the Dharma of the results of actions. Not far from here, you may go and ask Him. He will perfectly explain to you the Dharma regarding the results of actions, which gods, demons, Brahma, ascetics, and brahmins cannot elucidate—only the Tathāgata can explain to you. I am not yet proficient in this Dharma, but only the World-Honored One, who is best at understanding the law of actions and their results, can speak of it to you." At that time, the multitude of bhikṣus headed towards the presence of the World-Honored One.

爾時，世尊依晝時法，如須彌山，自光網焰如晝日明；如夜中月，如月清涼；如陂池清，甚深如海，安住不動如須彌山，心無所畏如師子王，一切眾生之所歸依。猶如父母，大悲熏心，一切眾生唯一上親。慈、悲、喜、捨為依止處，以三十七大菩提分勝妙之法莊嚴其身，一切眾生清淨眼觀無有厭足，勝日月光。釋迦王子偈言：
At that time, the World-Honored One, following the daylight dharma, was like Mount Sumeru, his own light and flames bright as the daytime sun; like the moon in the midst of night, cool as the moon; like the clear water of a pond, very deep like the ocean, abiding still and unmoved like Mount Sumeru, his mind fearless like the king of lions, a refuge for all beings. Just like a father and mother, his heart permeated with great compassion, all beings are his only close kin. Relying on loving-kindness, compassion, joy, and equanimity as places of support, adorning his body with the thirty-seven aids to enlightenment, sublime dharmas of exceptional virtuous qualities, all beings' eyes of purity never satiated, more brilliant than the light of the sun and moon. Prince Siddhartha recited a verse:


「世尊廣普眼，　　無三垢淨眼，
能巧說二諦，　　善知三種苦。
World-Honored One, broadly universally gazing,
Eyes free and clear of all three defilements (greed, hatred, and delusion),
Able to skillfully speak two truths,
Well acquainted with all three types of suffering (suffering of suffering, suffering of change, and all-pervasive suffering).

如是佛世尊，　　已修二種修，
現證於道果，　　滅諦智具足。
In this way, Buddha, World-Honored One,
Already realized in two types of realization,
Spontaneously realized in result of path,
Completed in wisdom (prajñā) that accords with true cessation.

遠離三界眼，　　而說異三界，
知十八界諦，　　觀知解脫諦。
Far removed from eyes of three realms (desire, form, and formless realms),
And speech different from the three realms (desire, form, and formless realms),
Knows truth of eighteen realms (realms of six sense organs, six sense objects, and six consciousnesses),
Intuiting (vipaśyanā) awareness (jñāna) of true liberation.

十八功德眾，　　自功德相應，
解脫九繫縛，　　具足十種力。
Eighteen virtues congregate,
One's own virtue coalesces,
Liberated from nine bonds (attachment to desire, form, formless realms, ignorance, views, doubt, desire for existence, desire for non-existence, and pride),
Complete in ten powers (TODO).

成就四無畏，　　亦成就大悲，
大悲心深潤，　　成就三念處。」
Completely practiced four fearlessnesses (fearlessness of the teaching, fearlessness of the truth, fearlessness of the path, and fearlessness of the result [buddha/bodhisattva]),
Also completely practiced great compassion,
Deeply nurtered essence completely practiced great compassion,
Completely practiced three recollections (recollection of the Buddha, recollection of the Dharma, and recollection of the Saṅgha).

爾時，眾多比丘既見世尊，整服一肩，如法叉跪，右膝著地禮世尊足，退在一面，正威儀住，低頭斂容。爾時，眾多比丘推一比丘往近世尊，復更頂禮世尊足已，白言：「世尊！我於晨朝著衣持鉢，入王舍城而行乞食。如上所說，次第乃至共彼外道遮羅迦波離婆闍迦問難語說，彼問身業、口業、意業，皆如上說。」
At that time, after seeing the World-Honored One, numerous bhikṣus draped their robes over one shoulder, knelt with their right knees on the ground, and paid homage to the World-Honored One's feet. Then, they stepped back to one side, stood with proper decorum, and bowed their heads respectfully. At that time, the multitude of bhikṣus pushed one bhikṣu forward towards the World-Honored One. After paying homage to the World-Honored One's feet again, he respectfully said: "World-Honored One! Early this morning, after donning my robes and taking my alms bowl, I entered the city of Rājagṛha to beg for food. Just as previously mentioned, sequentially I encountered an externalist named Jālakabharadvāja who challenged me with difficult questions regarding the actions of body, speech, and mind, all as previously described."

爾時，世尊先觀察已，然後為說。爾時，世尊為彼比丘、那羅陀村諸婆羅門而說法言：「汝諸比丘！我所說法，初、中、後善，義善、語善，法應具足清淨鮮白，梵行開顯，所謂正法念處法門。諦聽，諦聽！善思念之，我為汝說。」
At that time, after seeing the World-Honored One, numerous bhikṣus draped their robes over one shoulder, knelt with their right knees on the ground, and paid homage to the World-Honored One's feet. Then, they stepped back to one side, stood with proper decorum, and bowed their heads respectfully. At that time, the multitude of bhikṣus pushed one bhikṣu forward towards the World-Honored One. After paying homage to the World-Honored One's feet again, he respectfully said: "World-Honored One! Early this morning, after donning my robes and taking my alms bowl, I entered the city of Rājagṛha to beg for food. Just as previously mentioned, sequentially I encountered an externalist named Jālakabharadvāja who challenged me with difficult questions regarding the actions of body, speech, and mind, all as previously described."

諸比丘言：「如是。世尊！」彼諸比丘於世尊所，至心諦聽。
The bhikkhus said, "So it is, World-Honored One!" Those bhikkhus, in the presence of the World-Honored One, listened earnestly and attentively.

爾時，世尊為諸比丘，如是說言：「諸比丘！何者正法念處法門？所謂法見法、非法見非法，常念彼處心不生疑，憙樂聞法，供養長宿。彼知身業、口業、意業，業果生滅，不顛倒見，不行異法。諸比丘！身業三種，所謂殺生、偷盜、邪婬。云何殺生？於他眾生，生眾生想，起殺害心，斷其命根，得成殺生。彼有三種，謂上、中、下。所言上者，殺羅漢等，墮阿鼻獄；所言中者，殺住道人；所言下者，殺不善人及殺畜生。又復三種，所謂過去、未來、現在。又復三種，所謂貪作、瞋作、癡作。彼貪作者，所謂獵等；彼瞋作者，所謂下性；彼癡作者，外道齋等。又復三種，所謂自作、他教、二作。有五因緣，雖是殺生，無殺罪業，所謂道行無心傷殺蠕、蟻等命；若擲鐵等，無心殺生而斷物命；醫師治病為利益故，與病者藥，因藥命斷，醫無惡心；父母慈心為治故打，因打命終；燃火虫入，無心殺虫，虫入火死。如是五種，雖斷生命，不得殺罪。又復更有三種殺生，所謂教他、自作、二作。
At that time, the World-Honored One addressed the bhikkhus, saying: “O bhikkhus! What is the method of the mindfulness of the right Dharma? It is as thus: to see the Dharma as Dharma, to see the non-Dharma as non-Dharma, always mindful in that way without giving rise to doubt, joyous in hearing the Dharma, and offering sustenance to the elders. One knows bodily actions, verbal actions, and mental actions, the arising and ceasing of the results of actions, without inverse views, not practicing heterodox ways. O bhikkhus! There are three types of bodily actions: namely, killing, stealing, and sexual misconduct. How is killing defined? It entails projecting the thought of harming towards another sentient being, arising the intention to kill, severing their life force, thus accomplishing the act of killing. This has three classifications: superior, middling, and inferior. Speaking of the superior, it refers to killing an arhat and falls into the Avīci hell; the middling refers to killing a person on the path; the inferior involves killing a person of immoral conduct or killing animals. Furthermore, there are three categories: past, future, and present. Again, there are three types: done out of greed, done out of hatred, and done out of delusion. Those done out of greed are like hunting, etc.; those done out of hatred are referred to as being of a malicious nature; those done out of delusion include sacrifices of external sects, etc. Moreover, there are three modes: personally performed, instructed by others, and both. There are five conditions under which, although killing happens, no karmic sin of killing accrues: namely, when a practitioner accidentally harms and kills beings such as worms or ants during their practice; if without intention, lives are taken as a result of throwing objects like iron, etc.; when a physician administers medicine for the benefit of a patient, and the patient dies as a result of the medicine without malicious intent from the doctor; when parents discipline their child out of compassion, resulting in the child’s death; when one lights a fire, and insects inadvertently enter and die. Such five kinds, though they involve taking life, do not incur the sin of killing. Additionally, there are three more kinds of killing: teaching others to kill, killing personally, and both.

「又修行者內心思惟——隨順正法觀察法行——云何偷盜成就滿足？云何偷盜得果報少？彼見聞知或天眼見：他物他攝、自意盜取，如是偷盜成就滿足。若是王法，為饒益尊父母、病人、緣覺、羅漢、阿那含人、斯陀含人、須陀洹等，若為病急，若為飢急；彼為饒益，如是偷盜，得果報少，盜業不具。又復偷盜得果報少，謂偷盜已，專心懺悔；既懺悔已，後更不作；遮他偷盜，教不盜戒，示其善道，令住善法遠離偷盜。如是盜業不具足滿。何業具足？若人偷盜，彼偷盜人若誑惑他，屏處思量作欺誑事，斗秤治物作惡業行，如是種種，此業具足。云何成業？若他攝物，知已盜取，如是成業。何業具足？作已隨喜，樂行多作，向他讚說，又復教他善戒者盜，此業具足。如是三業具足不減，餘偷盜業，得果報少而不決定。
"Furthermore, practitioners contemplate within their minds — observing the practice of Dharma in accordance with the true Dharma — how is thievery fully accomplished? How does thievery result in lesser fruitions? They observe through direct perception or divine vision: taking others' possessions without permission, intending to steal by oneself, such actions of theft are fully accomplished. If it's due to royal decree, for the benefit of honoring parents, the ill, Pratyekabuddhas, Arhats, Anāgāmin, Sakadāgāmin, Stream-enterers, in urgent situations of illness or hunger; for their benefit, such theft results in lesser fruitions, without fully constituting the karmic act of stealing. Moreover, theft resulting in lesser fruitions includes: after stealing, sincerely repenting; having repented, not committing the act again; preventing others from stealing, teaching the precept against stealing, showing the righteous path, guiding them to dwell in wholesome Dharma away from theft. Thus, the act of stealing is not fully accomplished. What constitutes a fully accomplished act? If a person steals, deceiving others, contemplating in solitude to commit deceit, engaging in fraudulent measures and misconducts, such various actions fully constitute the act. How is an act fully formed? If one takes others' possessions, knowing it to be stealing, thus the act is formed. What fully constitutes an act? Being delighted after committing the act, happily engaging in it repeatedly, praising it to others, and even teaching others to steal, such acts are fully constituted. Thus, these three kinds of acts are fully constituted without diminishment, other acts of stealing result in lesser fruition and are not definitive."

「又修行者內心思惟——隨順正法觀察法行——云何邪婬？此邪婬人，若於自妻，非道而行，或於他妻，道非道行；若於他作，心生隨喜；若設方便，強教他作。是名邪婬。云何邪婬得果報少？若邪婬已，專心懺悔，不隨喜他，遮他邪婬，示其善道，彼邪婬業不具足滿。離邪婬意，修行善戒，如是邪婬得果報少，不決定受。
"Furthermore, practitioners contemplate within their minds — observing the practice of Dharma in accordance with the true Dharma — how is sexual misconduct? The person of sexual misconduct, whether with their own spouse, behaves improperly, or with another's spouse, acts immorally or not; if rejoices in the act done by another; if devises strategies, forcibly instructing others to commit the act. This is called sexual misconduct. How does sexual misconduct result in lesser fruitions? If after committing sexual misconduct, one sincerely repents, does not take joy in another's misconduct, prevents others from such misconduct, shows them the virtuous path, then the act of sexual misconduct is not fully accomplished. Deviating from the intentions of sexual misconduct, practicing virtuous precepts, thus sexual misconduct results in lesser fruitions, and is not definitively received."

「如是三種身不善業，得果報少，果報輕軟。如是外道遮羅迦波離婆闍迦所不能知，非其境界；并天、世間，若魔、若梵、沙門、婆羅門，一切世間、諸天人等所不能知，除我聲聞，從我聞故，知業果報，更無教者。
"Such three types of unwholesome bodily actions result in lesser retributions, and the retributions are light and mild. Such is unknown to the externalist Jālakabharadvāja, beyond his comprehension; as well as beyond the comprehension of gods, humans, demons, Brahma, Śramaṇas, Brahmins, and all beings in the world, except for my Śrāvakas. By hearing from me, they understand the results of actions, and there is no other teacher."

「又修行者知業果報，云何口業惡不善行？口業四種，所謂妄語、兩舌、惡口、綺語，如是四種。何者妄語？自思惟已，然後於他作不實語，若作呪誓，若在王前，若王等前，妄語言說，令他衰惱，或打、或縛、或令輸物；彼成妄語如是滿足，成妄語業地獄中受。
"Furthermore, practitioners know the results of actions. What are the unwholesome actions of speech? There are four types: false speech, divisive speech, harsh speech, and frivolous speech. What is false speech? After contemplating within oneself, then speaking untruthfully to others, whether swearing falsely, in front of a king, or before equals to the king, speaking falsely, causing others to be distressed, or leading to being beaten, bound, or forced to forfeit possessions; such complete acts of false speech result in suffering in hell."

「復有口業名為兩舌，於和合者、共作業者，破壞語說；如是語者，成就兩舌。云何此語得果報少？破壞語已，心中生悔：『我愚癡故作如是說。』專心懺悔，亦遮他人作破壞語，示其善道，業不具足，此業不重。云何此業不具足滿？此破壞語，或以煩惱、或以酒醉，心異分別，向他異說，此業不足。云何名為業道相應成破壞語？若以惡心破壞於他，隨喜讚嘆，如是名為業道相應成破壞語。云何此業決定成就破壞語說？作已隨喜，復教他作，隨喜讚說；喜樂貪著，不離於心；常懷惡心，他人所避；不可往返，為他毀呰；不生羞恥，無慚、無愧，不能自知。如是名為破壞語業。
Furthermore, there is verbal misconduct known as divisive speech, which involves speaking to disrupt the harmony among those in agreement or those working together, thus fracturing relationships with words. Such speech accomplishes divisive speech. How does one receive lesser results from such speech? After engaging in divisive speech, if one feels remorse thinking, "Out of my foolishness, I have spoken thus," and sincerely repents, also prevents others from engaging in divisive speech, shows them a virtuous path, the misconduct is not fully ripened, this misconduct is not grave. How is this misconduct not fully consummated? This divisive speech, either motivated by affliction or drunkenness, involves the mind discriminating differently and speaking differently to others, this misconduct is insufficient. How is it termed that one's actions correspond with the path to engaging in divisive speech? If one disrupts harmony with a malevolent intent and feels joyful and praises such action, so it is termed that one's actions correspond with the path to engaging in divisive speech. How is this misconduct definitively brought to fruition as divisive speech? If after the act, one delights in it, further encourages others to do it, praising such action; clinging to joy and attachment, not departing from the mind; always harboring malintent, being avoided by others; irreversible, damaging others with slander; lacking shame, void of remorse and humility, and unable to recognize oneself. Such is termed the misconduct of divisive speech.

「又修行者觀察業集，云何名為惡口業行？彼見聞知或天眼見：如是惡口能生熱惱，聞不悅耳，不忍他惡，令異人信，若重、若輕，戲笑、瞋心，得無量報、無量種報。彼重惡口，墮於地獄；彼輕惡口，不決定受。如是名為第三口業，彼業具足相應之義，如前所說。
"Furthermore, practitioners observe the collection of actions, how is the action of harsh speech defined? They observe through direct perception or divine vision: such harsh speech can generate irritation, is unpleasant to hear, unable to endure the faults of others, persuading different individuals to believe, whether serious or minor, ridicule, anger in the heart, receiving immeasurable retributions, immeasurable kinds of retribution. Such grave harsh speech, leads to falling into hell; such minor harsh speech, does not decisively receive [retribution]. Thus is called the third verbal action, this action is fully endowed with the corresponding meaning, as previously stated."

「又修行者知業報法，云何名為第四口業無義綺語？前後相違，不相應說。不決定受，決定如餘，如是名為第四口業。
"Furthermore, practitioners knowing the law of karmic results, what is termed as the fourth verbal action, frivolous speech without substance? Contradicting earlier and later statements, speaking inconsistently. Not definitively received, determined as with the others, thus is called the fourth verbal action.

「又修行者觀業報法，云何意業？意業幾種？彼見聞知，意業三種：貪、瞋、邪見。何者為貪？若見他人富者財物，心生希望欲得彼物，是意貪業。復次，意業：若見他人富者財物，心生惡嫉，是意嫉業；若生邪見、生顛倒見，是邪見業。彼有二種，謂失、不信。云何不信？彼人心謂：『無施、無祀，無齋、無會，無有善業、無不善業，無業果報。』廣則無量。云何為失？彼人心謂一切苦樂皆是天作，非業果報。如是二種，名為邪見。
"Furthermore, practitioners observe the law of karmic results, what are mental actions? How many types of mental actions are there? They perceive and know that there are three types of mental actions: greed, hatred, and wrong view. What is classified as greed? If upon seeing another person's wealth, one's mind gives rise to the hope and desire to obtain their possessions, this is considered the mental action of greed. Again, regarding mental actions: if upon seeing another person's wealth, one's mind gives rise to jealousy, this is the mental action of jealousy; if one harbors wrong views, giving rise to distorted perceptions, this is the action of wrong view. There are two types, namely, confusion and disbelief. What is disbelief? The person's mind thinks: 'There is no giving, no offering, no fasting, no assembly, no good karma, no bad karma, no result of karma.' Broadly speaking, it is immeasurable. What is confusion? The person's mind considers all happiness and suffering to be created by gods, not as results of karma. Such two types are called wrong view."

「又修行者觀業報法，云何三種身、口、意業，如是十種，樂行多作，彼決定受？此義云何？何者業果於現世受？何者業果於生世受？何者業果於餘世受？復於世間何處何生？彼見聞知或天眼見：身業殺生樂行多作，墮於地獄、畜生、餓鬼。若生人中，命則短促。若因貪心獵等殺生，彼人則生猪鹿、雉雞、迦賓闍羅如是等中，獵師圍兵之所殺害，乃至作魚，鈎釣所殺。彼前作業，相似因緣，常在生死；若生人中，命則短促；設得生天，不得好處，多有鐵畏，速為他殺。殺生之報，有下、中、上。偈言：
Practitioners further contemplate the law of karmic results, how are the three types of actions by body, speech, and mind, these ten kinds, fervently performed, and how are they definitively received? What does this mean? Which karmic results are experienced in the present life? Which in the next life? And which in lives thereafter? Where in the world and in what birth will one be reborn? They observe through direct perception or divine vision: those who extensively perform the bodily action of killing, fall into hells, become animals, or hungry ghosts. If born among humans, their lifespan is short. If driven by greed to hunt and kill, such a person will be reborn among pigs, deer, pheasants, chickens, or beings like Jabinjala and be killed by hunters and soldiers, or even becoming a fish killed by hooks. Such past actions, due to similar causes and conditions, are always within the cycle of birth and death; if born among humans, their lifespan is short; if born in heavens, they do not gain favorable conditions, fearful of many things, quickly killed by others. The retribution of killing has levels: low, medium, and high.

「『有於藏中死，　　有生已命終，
有能行則亡，　　有能走便卒。』
Some die in the womb,
Some die as soon as they are born,
Some die as soon as they can move,
Some die as soon as they can walk.

「彼殺生者，此業成就勢力果報，謂地獄受，若現在受，若餘殘受。
"Those who kill, the actions completed with force result in retribution such as hell, whether it is experienced in the present or in residual forms."

「又修行者觀業果報，云何偷盜樂行多作，報有三種，謂地獄受、若現在受、若餘殘受？彼偷盜業樂行多作，墮於地獄、畜生、餓鬼。若生人中則常貧窮；若得財物畏王、水、火、劫賊因緣，具足失奪，不曾得樂。彼偷盜業，得如是等三種果報。
Furthermore, practitioners observe the karmic results. How does one who indulges in and frequently performs acts of stealing face three kinds of retributions, namely, suffering in hell, suffering in the present life, and residual suffering? Those indulging in and frequently performing the act of stealing fall into hells, become animals, or hungry ghosts. If born among humans, they are always impoverished; even if they acquire wealth, they fear kings, water, fire, and thieves due to various causes, suffering complete loss, never finding joy. Such actions of stealing result in these three kinds of results.

「又修行者觀業果報，云何邪婬樂行多作，得三種果？彼見聞知或天眼見：若彼邪婬樂行多作，墮於地獄、畜生、餓鬼。若生人中，餘殘果報，妻不隨順；若得二根，世間所惡。
"Furthermore, practitioners observe the karmic results. How does indulgence in sexual misconduct result in three kinds of consequences? They perceive, through direct observation or divine vision: those who indulge in sexual misconduct, fall into hells, become animals, or hungry ghosts. If born among humans as a residual consequence, their spouse is not compliant; if they acquire two bases, they are detested by the world."

「彼如是等三種身業、三種果報，非彼外道遮羅迦波離婆闍迦之所能解。廣說身業，則有無量，皆不能解。何以故？彼以癡法熏其心故，唯我能解。我實不見餘人能解，更無有人能見如是業果報法，如我見者。若我弟子修行法者，以從我聞，是故能解。
"Furthermore, practitioners observe the karmic results. How does indulgence in sexual misconduct result in three kinds of consequences? They perceive, through direct observation or divine vision: those who indulge in sexual misconduct, fall into hells, become animals, or hungry ghosts. If born among humans as a residual consequence, their spouse is not compliant; if they acquire two bases, they are detested by the world."

"These various types of bodily actions and their three kinds of results are not within the comprehension of the externalist Jālakabharadvāja. Even if the bodily actions are explained extensively and are innumerable, they cannot be understood. Why is that? Because their minds are permeated with the dharma of ignorance, only I can understand. I truly do not see others who can understand, and no one else is capable of perceiving such laws of action and result as I do. If my disciples practice the Dharma, it is because they have heard it from me, and therefore, they can understand."

「又修行者內心思惟——隨順正法觀察法行——云何口業？口業幾種？彼見聞知或天眼見：口業四種，所謂妄語、兩舌、惡口、綺語。若彼妄語樂行多作，墮於地獄、畜生、餓鬼。若生人中，一切眾生不信其語，諸善眾會、善長者眾、剎利等眾及妻子等，不信其語；口常爛臭，齒亦不好，面皮無色；一切世人妄語枉謗；常生怖畏；親友、兄弟、知識不固；一切所作不得果利，於一切人不得饒益。如是妄語是不可愛，非是可樂，非是可意，成就如是不善業果。
"Furthermore, practitioners contemplate within their minds — observing the practice of Dharma in accordance with the true Dharma — what are verbal actions? How many types of verbal actions are there? They observe through direct perception or divine vision: there are four types of verbal actions, namely, false speech, divisive speech, harsh speech, and frivolous speech. If one frequently indulges in false speech, they fall into hell, become an animal, or a hungry ghost. If born among humans, all beings disbelieve their words, whether in assemblies of the virtuous, among respected elders, groups such as the Śakya, or even among wives and children; no one believes their words; their mouth constantly emits a foul odor, their teeth are also unattractive, their facial skin lacks luster; all people in the world disparage their false and slanderous words; constantly living in fear; friendships, brotherhood, and acquaintanceships are unstable; all their endeavors do not bear fruitful results, and they are of no benefit to anyone. Thus, false speech is unlovable, not joyful, not agreeable, resulting in such unwholesome karmic fruits."

「又修行者內心思惟——隨順正法觀察法行——云何名為第二口業樂行多作，成就果報？彼見聞知或天眼見：如是兩舌樂行多作，墮於地獄、畜生、餓鬼。若生人中，若聾、若瘂；口常爛臭；無人信語，眾人所笑；面色不好；不住一處，心動不定；常行惡行。如是名為兩舌業報。
"Furthermore, practitioners contemplate within their minds — observing the practice of Dharma in accordance with the true Dharma — what is termed as the verbal misconduct of engaging in divisive speech and resulting in its fruition? They observe through direct perception or divine vision: those who indulge in divisive speech fall into hells, become animals, or hungry ghosts. If born among humans, they are either deaf or mute; their mouth constantly emits a foul odor; no one believes their words, they are ridiculed by people; their complexion is unappealing; they are restless, unable to stay in one place, their mind is unstable; they persistently engage in evil deeds. Such is known as the karmic retribution of divisive speech."

「又修行者內心思惟——隨順正法觀察法行——云何名為第三口業樂行多作，成就業果？彼見聞知或天眼見：如是惡口樂行多作，墮於地獄、畜生、餓鬼。若生人中，處處皆畏，一切人所皆得衰惱；無人安慰，於自妻子不得愛語，猶如野鹿畏一切人；遠善知識、近惡知識。是名惡口三種果報。
"Furthermore, practitioners contemplate within their minds — observing the practice of Dharma in accordance with the true Dharma — what leads to being daily called the third type of verbal action, indulging in harsh speech, and resulting in its karmic fruits? They perceive through direct knowledge or divine vision: such indulgence in harsh speech leads to fall into hells, become animals, or hungry ghosts. If born among humans, they are feared everywhere, causing distress to all beings; no one offers comfort, and they cannot speak words of love to their own spouses and children, resembling a wild deer feared by all; distant from good companions, close to wicked ones. This is called the three kinds of fruits of harsh speech.

「又修行者內心思惟——隨順正法觀察法行——云何綺語樂行多作？彼見聞知或天眼見：若彼綺語樂行多作，墮於地獄、畜生、餓鬼。若生人中，一切不愛，王舍、怨家、兄弟、親家輕弄嫌賤。此是綺語口業果報。
"Furthermore, practitioners contemplate within their minds — observing the practice of the Dharma in accordance with the true Dharma — how is frivolous speech indulged in extensively? They observe through direct perception or divine vision: if they indulge extensively in frivolous speech, they fall into hells, become animals, or hungry ghosts. If born among humans, they are unloved by all, ridiculed and despised by their community, enemies, siblings, and relatives. This is the karmic retribution of frivolous speech."

「又修行者內心思惟——隨順正法觀察法行——云何意業三種不善，樂行多作意不善業？彼見聞知或天眼見：若彼貪心，樂行多作意不善業，墮於地獄、畜生、餓鬼。若生人中，雖有財物，則為王、賊及水、火等無理橫失，恒常貧窮。
"Furthermore, practitioners contemplate within their minds — observing the practice of Dharma in accordance with the true Dharma — how are the three types of unwholesome mental actions, and how does one eagerly engage in unwholesome mental actions? They observe through direct perception or divine vision: If they indulge in greed-driven unwholesome mental actions, they fall into hells, become animals, or hungry ghosts. If born among humans, despite possessing wealth, they are subject to loss through kings, thieves, and natural disasters like fire and water, constantly living in poverty."

「又修行者內心思惟——隨順正法觀察法行——云何瞋心樂行多作意不善業？彼見聞知或天眼見：瞋心意業樂行多作意不善業，墮於地獄、畜生、餓鬼。若生人中，則生邊地夷人之中，常畏鐵處，常怖魄處，墮嶮岸處；彼人之心不曾安隱，常被誹謗，常得如是多種眾惡。
"Furthermore, practitioners contemplate within their minds — observing the practice of Dharma in accordance with the true Dharma — how does one who is habituated to anger engage in unwholesome mental actions? They observe through direct perception or divine vision: those whose mental actions are dominated by anger and who frequently engage in such unwholesome mental actions, fall into hell, become animals, or hungry ghosts. If born among humans, they are born among the borderland barbarians, always fearing places of iron, constantly terrified of places of horror, falling into perilous places; the minds of such people are never at ease, constantly subjected to slander, always encountering various kinds of numerous evils."

「又修行者內心思惟——隨順正法觀察法行——云何邪見樂行多作意不善業？彼見聞知或天眼見：邪見意業樂行多作，墮於阿鼻地獄等中受一切苦；若墮畜生，於無量世百千萬億億數轉生；餓鬼境界亦復如是。若生人中，如法所說自種性業善業道行，不依法行，於上世來父、祖種性千倍下劣。
"Furthermore, practitioners contemplate within their minds — observing the practice of Dharma in accordance with the true Dharma — how does entertaining wrong views result in unwholesome mental actions? They observe through direct perception or divine vision: those indulging in the mental action of wrong views fall into the Avīci hell, suffering all kinds of torments; or, if they fall into the state of animals, they undergo countless rebirths in hundreds of thousands of millions of billions; and the realm of hungry ghosts is likewise. If born among humans, as the Dharma speaks, their conduct due to their own intrinsic nature, not following the Dharma, is a thousand times inferior compared to that of their ancestors in previous lives."

「又修行者內心思惟——隨順正法觀察法行，更復思法深細觀察——云何如是十不善法，流轉生死，世間、地獄、餓鬼、畜生？彼見聞知或天眼見：云何殺生？云何樂行？云何多作？謂殺生者，此殺生人，近惡知識。若惡知識近住之人，與彼相隨，喜樂彼人相隨遊戲，共行、共宿，於彼生信，謂有功德，隨彼所作亦與同行。彼人如是近惡知識，彼殺生人、近殺生者，則以種種殺生因緣教令殺生：或外道齋、或屠獵等，如貪味者說殺生事；如怨家者說殺生事；如賊貪物說殺生事；如鬪戰者說殺生事；如貪名者說殺生利。彼人聞已，心則生信，亦隨順行，憙樂殺生。如是喜樂，既殺生已，墮於地獄、餓鬼、畜生，不可愛著，心不樂處，一切善人訾毀之處。以此因故，若生人中，命則短促。如是殺生，近惡知識以為種子。
"Furthermore, practitioners contemplate deeply within their minds — in accordance with the true Dharma, they observe the practice of Dharma — how are such ten unwholesome practices, circulating in the cycle of birth and death, in human realms, hells, hungry ghosts, and animals? They see, hear, know or through the divine eye see: How is life taken? How is pleasure found in it? How is it frequently done? Regarding those who kill, such a person who takes life is close to evil companions. If a person close to evil companions lives nearby, and follows them, delighting in their company, playing together, acting and sleeping together, developing faith in them, thinking they have merit, and also acting together in whatever they do. Such a person, being close to evil companions, near those who kill, then teaches various causes and conditions for taking life: be it through heretical sacrifices, or hunting, etc., explaining the act of killing for those lusting after taste; explaining the act of killing for those holding grudges; explaining the act of killing for thieves lusting after properties; explaining the act of killing for warriors; explaining the benefits of killing for those craving recognition. Upon hearing this, the person’s heart develops faith, and also follows suit, finding joy in taking life. Thus, with such joy, having killed, one falls into hells, becomes a hungry ghost, or an animal, unloved, where the mind finds no pleasure, a place scorned by all good people. For this reason, if born among humans, their life is then short-lived. Thus, killing being sown as a seed by evil companions."

「云何樂行？彼不善人既殺生已，憙樂歡喜，心意分別，見殺功德。如是分別則有多種：斷他命已，不生懊悔，讚說言善；心不放捨，轉復更作，教他人作；既教他已，說彼殺生種種功德，異異因緣，如前所說。如是名為樂行殺生。
"What is joyous conduct? Once the wicked person has committed murder, they delight and rejoice in their heart, discriminating and perceiving the act of killing as meritorious. Such discrimination has many types: after taking another's life, they feel no regret, praising and speaking well of it; their mind does not let go, they continue to act further, teaching others to do the same; after teaching others, they speak of various merits of killing and different causes and conditions, as previously mentioned. This is called joyous conduct in killing.

「云何多作？此殺生已，如前行說，近惡知識，習作殺生，多造殺具，作危嶮處，作圍、毒箭，集養狗等，養殺生鳥，近旃陀羅，造鬪戰具——鎧鉀、刀杖及以𥎞鉾、鬪戰之輪種種器仗——諸殺生具，如是一切皆悉攝取。如是惡人多作殺生，以是因緣，墮於地獄、畜生、餓鬼，受極苦惱殺生之業，有下、中、上；受苦報時，亦下、中、上。
"What is excessive action? After killing, as previously stated, being close to evil companions, habituated to killing, creating many tools for killing, building perilous places, making enclosures, poison arrows, gathering and raising dogs and the like, raising birds for killing, being close to Chandala, making battle gear—armor, shields, swords, staves, lances, spears, and various types of weapons—all such tools for killing, all of these are thoroughly included. Such evil people excessively engage in killing, and due to this cause and condition, they fall into hell, become animals, or hungry ghosts, and suffer extreme misery from the karma of killing, with low, medium, and high levels; when receiving the retribution of suffering, there are also low, medium, and high levels."

「既作業已，如是不得不受果報。如是如是，自作惡業、自得惡報。若黠慧人，捨惡行善彼世間中。如是殺生，樂行、多作。
"After the deed is done, it is inevitable to face the consequence. In such cases, one who performs evil deeds will receive evil consequences. If a wise person abandons evil and acts virtuously in this world, such as refraining from killing, delighting in virtuous deeds, and engaging in them frequently."

「云何偷盜樂行多作？云何樂行多作盜已，墮於地獄？此惡戒人，性自偷盜近惡知識。若惡知識近住之人，與彼相隨，則行偷盜，有下、中、上。何者為下？謂王法等，如前所說。何者為中？非福田所，偷盜彼物，此盜為中。何者為上？佛、法、僧物，微少偷盜，是則為上。彼佛、法、僧，若盜僧物，佛、法能淨；盜佛、法物，僧不能淨。若盜眾僧現食用物，墮大地獄，頭面在下；若取屬僧所常食物，則墮無間阿鼻地獄，寬廣闇等，以重福田，微少偷盜。以有心念，樂行多作，彼少偷盜，墮於地獄、畜生、餓鬼。若復懺悔，不生隨喜，心中生悔，彼不定受。若偷盜人，無量方便而行偷盜，以如是故名為偷盜。
"What is excessive stealing? How does indulging in excessive stealing lead to falling into hell? Such evil-minded persons, by nature, are inclined towards stealing, being close to evil companions. If a person who is close to such evil companions follows them, then they engage in stealing, which has three levels: low, medium, and high. What is considered low? It refers to things like royal decrees, as previously mentioned. What is considered medium? Stealing from non-meritorious fields, stealing those things, this theft is considered medium. What is considered high? Items belonging to the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha, even minor thefts, are considered high. If one steals from the Sangha, the Buddha and Dharma can purify; stealing from the Buddha and Dharma, the Sangha cannot purify. If one steals the Sangha’s readily consumable goods, they fall into the great hells, with their heads facing downwards; if they take the food that regularly belongs to the Sangha, then they fall into the endless Avīci hell, and so forth, because of stealing from a highly meritorious field, even minor thefts. With deliberate intention, indulging in excessive acts, such minor acts of theft, lead to falling into hells, becoming animals, or hungry ghosts. If one repents, not taking joy in it, feels remorse in their heart, they receive indeterminate retribution. If a person steals using countless skillful means, for this reason, they are named as thieves."

「云何樂行偷盜他物？得已歡喜，與賊相隨，心以為樂；既得財物，作衣食已，心生歡喜讚其功德，教他偷盜；教已，讚說。如是名為樂行偷盜。
What is the joy in committing theft? Once they succeed, they feel elation and follow thieves, finding joy in their heart; once they obtain wealth, and use it for clothing and food, they feel joy and praise its merit, teaching others to steal; after teaching, they praise it. This is called joy in committing theft.

「云何多作？既偷盜已，多作床敷臥具氈被，食噉餅肉，衣服莊嚴，婬女娛樂，樗蒲博戲，心生喜悅：『我今快樂，一切樂中偷盜為最，以此因緣，我豐床敷、臥具、飲食、衣服莊嚴、婬女、樗蒲，第一勝樂。我今常當作偷盜行，令我後時增長富樂。』如前所說，如是如是，多行偷盜，決定於彼地獄中受。
"What is the repeated commitment to action? After stealing, they elaborate on bedding, mats, sleeping paraphernalia, rugs and quilts; they eat their fill of cakes and meat, dress in fine clothes, indulge in sensual pleasures with women, engage in gambling and dice games, their heart brimming with joy: 'I am now happy. Among all joys, stealing is supreme. By this cause and effect, I have abundant bedding, lying items, food and drink, clothes, women, and gambling, the utmost bliss. I shall always engage in stealing, letting it increase my wealth and pleasure in times to come.' As previously mentioned, in such ways, they frequently commit theft and are certainly to suffer in hell."

「云何邪婬樂行多作？此邪婬人，心不觀察婬欲覆蔽。若人先世婬欲處來，所謂鴛鴦、迦賓闍羅、孔雀、鸚鵡、魚雉、鷃鳥、阿修羅等，如是處來於此中生，常與多欲不善知識相隨共行。如是二分喜樂婬欲，心不觀察，心不厭足；不離欲心、不觀察行，隨有欲處往到其所，以欲處來此欲處生，喜行婬欲，故不觀察婬欲所覆。如是邪婬不善之人，觸染勢力，彼彼憙樂；如是邪婬，復更如是，心喜樂行，樂行如是邪婬惡觸。
"How does one indulge and engage extensively in sexual misconduct? Those inclined to sexual misconduct do not examine their minds, clouded by desire. If a person comes from a past life where they indulged in sexual desires, such as being a mandarin duck, a gandharva, a peacock, a parrot, a pheasant, a quail, an asura, etc., and is born into this realm, they constantly associate with those of similar excessive desires and unwholesome company. Thus indulging in the pleasure of sexual desires, without examination or satiety of the mind; not departing from desire, not examining actions, they go wherever desire leads, born from desire to this realm of desire, delighting in sexual misconduct, therefore they do not examine the overlay of sexual cravings. Such people of sexual misconduct, influenced by contaminating forces, delight in each other; thus indulging in sexual misconduct, further and thus, the mind delights in actions, indulging in such evil contacts of sexual misconduct."

「云何樂行？如是邪婬雖不常行而常憙樂，心意分別，更於餘處心不憙樂如婬欲者。如是樂行邪婬境界。
"What is the practice of delight? Even if such sexual misconduct is not always committed, the mind is always delighted, discriminating and contemplating, and in other places, the mind is not delighted as it is with sexual desires. This is the practice of delight in the realm of sexual misconduct."

「云何多作？愚癡凡夫，心不觀察，邪婬覆蔽，他復為說邪婬功德第一勝樂，所謂婬欲，言：『為此事非是不善。』復教多人憙樂婬欲。如是邪婬，愚癡凡夫憙樂多作。如是三種身不善業。「口業四種：妄語、兩舌、惡口、綺語。何者妄語？所謂自心先自作誑，然後誑他。如是妄語，自、他成誑。又彼妄語，五因緣發，所謂瞋、貪、邪法所攝、欲心、怖畏。
"What constitutes excessive actions? Foolish and ignorant laypeople do not observe their minds closely, being obscured by improper sexual desire. They further advocate the excellence of sexual desire as the supreme bliss, claiming, 'Engaging in such acts is not unwholesome.' They also teach many people to indulge in the joy of sexual desire. In this way, through sexual misconduct, foolish and ignorant laypeople rejoice in excessive actions. Such are the three types of unwholesome bodily actions. 'There are four kinds of verbal actions: false speech, divisive speech, harsh speech, and frivolous speech. What is false speech? It's when one first deceives oneself in their mind, and then deceives others. In this way, false speech occurs, deceiving both oneself and others. Furthermore, such false speech arises from five conditions, namely, anger, greed, being misled by wrongful views, desire, and fear."

「云何瞋心而發妄語？若於王前或大眾中、長者眾中，若善知識、怨家諍鬪，饒益知識，衰惱怨家，是故妄語。云何貪心而發妄語？見他財物，方便欲取，是故妄語。云何邪法所攝妄語？如婆羅門法中所說：『饒益尊故、饒益牛故、畏自死故、為取婦故，如是妄語，皆不得罪。』如是之人，邪法攝語。如是妄語，是愚癡人邪見攝語，此語堅重，於地獄受。是故乃至失命因緣，不應妄語。此妄語者，能為地獄第一種子。言：『為取婦，妄語無罪，是欲心發。』亦是邪法。云何怖畏而發妄語？何處怖畏？為彼饒益，是故妄語，起如是心：『若不妄語，彼則於我多不饒益。』彼人畏死，是故妄語。彼五因緣愚癡之人，作妄語說。如是一切皆住癡法。」
"How does an angry mind give rise to false speech? Whether in front of a king or in a great assembly, among elders, or when engaged in disputes with a good friend or an enemy, making trouble for the friend or defeating the enemy, hence false speech arises. How does a greedy mind give rise to false speech? Seeing others' possessions and desiring to take them by any means, hence false speech arises. How does false speech arise from being misled by wrongful views? As stated in the Brahmanical law: 'For the sake of honoring the worthy, for the sake of benefits to cows, out of fear of death, for the sake of obtaining a wife, such false speech commits no sin.' Such people are misled by wrongful views. Such false speech is the discourse of foolish people with wrongful views, this speech is gravely serious, leading to suffering in hell. Therefore, even at the risk of losing one's life, one should not speak falsely. Such falsehood can be the primary seed for hell. It is said: 'To take a wife, to speak falsely has no sin, is prompted by desire.' This too is misled by wrongful views. How does fear give rise to false speech? Where is the fear? For the sake of benefit to oneself, hence false speech arises, thinking thus: 'If I do not speak falsely, then he will not benefit me greatly.' The person fears death, hence speaks falsely. People foolish for these five reasons speak falsehoods. All such are abiding in the realm of ignorance."

爾時，世尊而說偈言：
At that time, the World-Honored One spoke in verse:

「若有何等人，　　起一妄語法，
則不畏他世，　　無惡不造作。


若人生世間，　　口中有大斧，
若以斫自他，　　口中惡語出。
如是應實語，　　不應斫他人，
雖無乞求者，　　應當多少與。
此三種行者，　　捨身則生天。

「若如是者，一切因緣，一切所作，莫妄語說。於他妄語心莫隨喜，亦不隨逐妄語者行，莫共同坐。若妄語人共行坐者，他人見之亦謂妄語。如是若與垢業之人共相隨者，則樂垢業。若與彼人共行坐等，雖無垢業，他謂垢業。若如是者，應觀察法：惡知識者，勿與相隨。此惡知識於生死中，最堅繫縛，則墮地獄、畜生、餓鬼，所謂隨逐惡知識行；若善知識相隨行者，則得解脫。廣則無量，此中如是略說妄語。

「又修行者內心思惟——隨順正法觀察法行——云何兩舌？兩舌幾種？彼見聞知或天眼見：兩舌者，多於和合人起破壞意，口中語說。兩舌二種：自作、教他。教他者，怨家、若似怨家所遣破壞。汝破彼人，是他因緣。有他不遣，自作破壞，令他衰惱。又復云何瞋因緣故，於他不愛？與他人惡口說惡語，聞者不愛。

「又修行者內心思惟——隨順正法觀察法行——云何惡口？彼見聞知或天眼見：彼惡口者，貪、瞋、癡發，一切愚癡凡夫之人常行不離。如是惡口有無量種，無量攀緣，無量因緣，無量心發，無量果報。此語能破無量善行；此語能與一切人惡。世間如怨，善人不近，人所不信，此語如毒。如是惡口，惡道因緣，是垢言語，正梵行人捨離不行。」

爾時，世尊而說偈言：

「黠慧離惡口，　　正語憙樂行，
如是美語人，　　則近涅槃住。
常說善妙語，　　捨離垢惡語，
垢惡語污人，　　能令到地獄。
垢語所污人，　　彼人則無善，
惡如師子蛇，　　彼不得生天。
一切善語人，　　能善安慰他，
諸世間所愛，　　後世則生天。
若人不惡語，　　捨離於諂曲，
雖人行如天，　　彼人善應禮。
實語常行忍，　　直心不諂曲，
不惱於他人，　　彼建立法幢。
人命不久住，　　猶如拍手聲，
人身不如法，　　愚癡空過世。
何人不自愛？　　何人不樂樂？
若人作惡業，　　不行自愛因。
妻子及財物，　　知識兄弟等，
皆悉不相隨，　　唯有善惡業。
善業不善業，　　常與相隨行，
如鳥行空中，　　影隨常不離。
如人乏資糧，　　道行則受苦，
不作善業者，　　彼眾生亦然；
如具資糧者，　　道行則安樂，
眾生亦如是，　　作福善處行。
久時遠行人，　　平安得還歸，
諸親友知識，　　見之皆歡喜；
作福者亦爾，　　此死他處生，
所作諸福德，　　如親等見喜。
如是作福德，　　和集資未來，
福德於他世，　　則得善住處。
福德天所讚，　　若人平等行，
此身不可毀，　　未來則生天。
觀如是處已，　　黠慧者學戒，
得聖見具足，　　善行得寂靜。

「又修行者內心思惟——隨順正法觀察法行，觀察第四不善業道綺語口業——云何綺語？綺語幾種？前後語言不相應說，故名綺語；心輕速轉，前後語言相應而說，亦名綺語。從慢心起，自輕因緣，令人不信，即於現身是惡道生，一切世間輕毀之因，無所饒益。垢語綺語，如是第四垢語口業，非善業道，勿作綺語亦莫隨喜，不應受行。若綺語者，則非善人。

「意不善者：貪、瞋、邪見。云何為貪？他所攝物，自心分別，欲得彼物，非正觀察。彼人如是愛樂他物，於他所有，無因、無分而自擾惱，望得彼物，故名意貪不善業道，非是可愛，非是可樂；所得果報，非意相應，非寂靜意，非是安樂。愚癡之人，虛妄生貪，他物叵得，虛妄分別生貪味著，心意動轉常生悕望，心樂欲取，見他財物，自得苦惱，故名為貪。如是意地第一貪心不善業道。

「又修行者內心思惟——隨順正法觀察法行——云何名瞋意地第二不善業道？彼見聞知或天眼見：於他前人無有因緣，起瞋惡意；又復於他若貧、若富，無有因緣而見他已，意地起發重惡瞋心。以瞋因緣，於地獄受。善法穀等，既成熟已，瞋心如雹，壞善穀等；唯正智眼，對治彼闇。瞋心如火，燒一切戒。瞋則色變，是惡色因。瞋如大斧，能斫法橋，住在心中，如怨入舍；此世、他世，心一正行，瞋能壞破。捨彼瞋心，慈是對治及四聖諦：苦、集、滅、道。行地獄行，瞋為上使，唯有善人、聖聲聞人、聞法義人乃能捨離。

「又修行者內心思惟——隨順正法觀察法行——云何邪見正法障礙，一切惡見，心之黑闇？彼見聞知或天眼見：無始以來行邪見因，墮於地獄、餓鬼、畜生，故名黑闇。樂邪見者，正道障礙，如刀、火、毒、嶮岸惡處，唯有一切愚癡之人，貪著樂行，以顛倒見，故名邪見。彼有二種：一、信邪因；二、心不信業果報法。信邪因者，作如是知：身等樂、苦皆是天作，非業果報。於業果報心不信者，謂無施等。是名邪見。如是十種不善業道、不饒益業，一切皆以邪見為本。

正法念處經卷第一
